“Iceman” tells a primal story without words

The prospect of Rhaetic dialogue with no subtitles is a daunting one. But there is a surprising clarity to Felix Randau’s bold film

https://cdn.static-economist.com/sites/default/files/20180804_BLP511.jpg

“ICEMAN”, Felix Randau’s wilderness chase thriller, opens with a caption declaring that the dialogue is in “an early version of the Rhaetic language”. Not to worry: “Translation is not necessary to follow the narrative.” It’s an audacious claim. When Mel Gibson used ancient languages in “The Passion of the Christ” (2004) and “Apocalypto” (2006), he added subtitles, so Mr Randau was taking a risk when he made what is essentially a silent movie. It’s a pity that he saddled his impressive high-concept experiment with a gimmicky title which has nothing to do with the mutant superhero from the X-Men, nor the 2012 hitman drama starring Michael Shannon.

The reason the film is called “Iceman”, or “Der Mann aus der Eis” in the original German, is that it was inspired by “Ötzi”, the well-preserved 5000-year-old corpse which was discovered in the Alps in 1991. Another opening caption declares that “this is his story”, an assertion which is only slightly less fanciful than saying that Hammer Horror’s “The Curse of the Mummy’s Tomb” (1964) is a docudrama about an Egyptian pharaoh. Ötzi’s cadaver undoubtedly bore traces of combat injuries, but whether that combat resembled what is shown in “Iceman” is anyone’s guess.

Still, the film-makers have researched and recreated his Neolithic lifestyle with care. The hero, identified in the end credits as Kelab (Jurgen Vogel), leads a pleasant life with a handful of friends and relatives in a valley encampment. There is the odd death in childbirth, but nothing too demanding or dangerous about Kelab’s daily routine: he goes hunting and gathering with his bow and arrow while his kinfolk feed the pigs and milk the goats back home. However, just when the film is starting to feel like a heritage centre’s demonstration of primitive farming methods, the plot arrives with the suddenness and force of a hatchet blow to the head (which is exactly what one of Kelab’s fellow tribesmen receives).

A raiding party from a distant land attacks the encampment in a bloody and brutal sequence, and when Kelab returns from a hunting expedition he finds that his huts have been burnt down and almost all of his loved ones have been butchered. The kicker is that the invaders have made off with a small sacred wooden box he calls “Tineeka”. Setting off over the mountains with a baby and a goat, he isn’t just intent on getting his vengeance, but on taking back his most treasured possession.

“Iceman” is an earnest yet pulpy adventure yarn in which a bow and arrow can seem as frightening and deadly as a sniper’s rifle. And its story is simple enough to justify that opening caption: you can follow the narrative without understanding the dialogue, which at any rate amounts to no more than a few guttural sentences. But it isn’t always easy. Every one of the male characters looks as if he is on his way to a Robinson Crusoe-themed fancy-dress party, so it’s often tricky to tell which fur-wrapped, shaggily bearded man is which. Nor can Mr Vogel convey much emotion through all that straggly hair. With such an unengaging protagonist, on what is more or less a hill-walking holiday, “Iceman” can sometimes be as much of a slog for the viewer as it is for him. 

Overall, the film pales in comparison with “The Revenant” (2015), the similarly beardy survival epic that bagged Leonardo DiCaprio an Oscar. As spectacular as the rugged Alpine scenery is in “Iceman”, it isn’t as awe-inspiring as the vistas in “The Revenant”. Nor does the leading man suffer quite as much for his art as he picks his way over glaciers and through primeval forests.

But the destination makes the journey worthwhile. When Kelab catches up with his enemies in the final scenes, the action intensifies, the characters deepen, and the stakes are raised. And when the contents of the hallowed “Tineeka” are revealed, the film makes some thoughtful points about the nature of revenge and about our fixation on sacred objects. It takes a while, but “Iceman” has something to say, even if you can’t understand a word of it.