A doctor-assisted suicide is a human right and a relief for many

Having witnessed five doctor-assisted deaths in Switzerland, Michael Irwin, a retired doctor, is struck by the calmness of those who undertake the process

https://www.economist.com/sites/default/files/imagecache/640-width/20180825_OPP513.jpg


BETWEEN 2005 and 2016 I witnessed five determined individuals receive a doctor-assisted suicide in Switzerland, where this possibility has existed for Swiss citizens for several decades. Only one was terminally ill. However, all of them were relaxed on their final day as they were avoiding further suffering.

I became involved in helping these five people because I had been a known right-to-die activist since 1996, when I became the chairman of the Voluntary Euthanasia Society (now Dignity in Dying), and because I am a retired doctor. Also, while assisting a suicide is a crime if this occurs in Britain, there is still some uncertainty if accompanying someone to Switzerland to end their life there will result in a prosecution, and I was willing to take this risk. So far, while several people who have travelled with a relative or a friend to Switzerland have been questioned by the police upon their return to Britain, only eight have ever been arrested, but, most importantly, no one has yet been charged. I was once arrested for donating money to help cover the expenses of someone wanting to commit assisted suicide. No charges were ever made. It did earn me a nickname in the tabloids though: “Dr Death”. 

In August 2005 I travelled with May Murphy, a 75-year-old widow who was suffering severely from multiple systems atrophy, from her home in Glasgow to Dignitas. She was so relaxed on the flight to Zurich: for example, when our plane landed, a flight attendant wished everyone a "safe onward journey", and she said, in a fairly loud voice: "If only you knew where I am going." Later, at Dignitas, as she raised the small glass to swallow the nembutal that would quickly end her life, she toasted her son (who had joined us in Zurich) and myself, thanking us for being with her.

Just over a year later I was asked to accompany Dave Richards to Dignitas as he did not wish anyone in his family to see him die. Aged 61, he was suffering from advanced Huntington's disease. He was also very calm on his final day: our discussion ranged from the nature of the universe to motor racing. Just before Dave drank the lethal nembutal, he removed his watch and asked me to give this to his wife when I returned to Britain.

My next visit to Zurich was in February 2007 when I joined Raymond Cutkelvin, terminally ill with cancer of the pancreas, Alan Rees, his partner of 28 years, and Simone, his niece. Raymond had become quite religious, converting to Buddhism, so it was a good omen when, in our taxi to Dignitas, he noticed a small Buddha figure on the dashboard (as our Swiss driver had a wife from Thailand). Raymond loved Motown music, and, with Diana Ross singing in the background, he had a brief dance with Simone a few minutes before he drank the nembutal. Afterwards, Alan became an active right-to-die activist, regularly describing his own personal experience.

It was a very personal trip that I made to Switzerland in March 2011 when I accompanied Nan Maitland, a close friend, and Liz, a mutual friend, to Bern, to Ex International. This is a similar organisation to Dignitas, but much smaller, and Nan went there because she had had previous contact with it. Nan lived alone in London but, in her 85th year, her busy social life was becoming very restricted because of extensive osteoarthritis. Again, it was amazing to see how someone determined to die, could be so calm. I sat next to Nan prepared to offer her a piece of chocolate to take, if required, when she had drunk the rather bitter nembutal. She did not need it. "It is not too bad," were her final words.

My last visit to Switzerland was in February 2016 to witness the doctor-assisted suicide of John Hofsess, a close Canadian friend, who had prostate cancer. For many years, he had been a leading campaigner for what is generally called “self-deliverance”—that is, bringing about one’s own death by taking responsibility for the whole procedure, including acquiring the means to do so—and he had assisted Al Purdy, a well-known Canadian poet, to die at home this way.  But when it came to his own death, he preferred to involve a doctor at Lifecircle (another Swiss organisation, located near Basel). On the day that he died, John was still working on the proof of his final book.

Each of the five persons that I have seen die in Switzerland were fortunate: they died as they wished, involving a doctor, with dignity. Dignitas, the first such organisation of its kind in the world, was founded in 1998 by Ludwig Minelli, a human-rights lawyer. Often, when debating questions about assisted dying, I recall a statement made by the European Court of Human Rights in 2002: "In an era of growing medical sophistication, combined with longer life expectancies, many people are concerned that they should not be forced to linger on in old age or in states of advanced physical or mental decrepitude which conflict with strongly held ideas of self and personal identity."

Michael Irwin, a retired GP and a former Medical Director of the United Nations in New York, is a patron of My Death My Decision, a right-to-die campaigning organisation in Britain
