How America’s car industry is coping with trade disputes

A tour of car country reveals anxiety across automotive supply chains

https://www.economist.com/sites/default/files/imagecache/640-width/images/print-edition/20180825_WBP002_0.jpg

THE Ford F-150 pickup truck has been America’s bestselling vehicle for years. In Dearborn, a city near Detroit, a factory that once produced Henry Ford’s Model A now cranks out one of these all-aluminium tributes to testosterone every 53 seconds. The F-150 is so profitable—informed rumours suggest each adds nearly $13,000 to Ford’s bottom line—that it is known around town as “the bank”.

It is also assembled in America with more American parts than most vehicles, and so about as impregnable as they come to President Donald Trump’s trade policies. Even so, over 15% of each pickup comes from Canada and Mexico and another 15% from outside North America. “Tariffs on Canadian aluminium hit the F-150 hard,” confirms a top logistics manager. The tariffs in question are Mr Trump’s duties of 10% on imported aluminium and 25% on imported steel, which took effect on June 1st. They are not the only source of disruption to an industry responsible for $522bn of exports and imports a year, more than one-tenth of America’s trade.

Earlier this year Mr Trump levied tariffs on $34bn of Chinese goods, including one of 25% on cars (another $16bn of goods were hit this week). China retaliated by raising its tariff on American cars from 25% to 40%. Partly to put pressure on Canada and Mexico to renegotiate the North American Free-Trade Agreement (NAFTA), the president has also threatened a 25% tariff on all car imports, invoking a provision of an old law which allows him to restrict trade to safeguard national security. That would immediately hit $208bn of car imports, not counting parts, according to the Peterson Institute of International Economics, a think-tank. American marques would be hit, too: four in five Chryslers and Dodges are made abroad (see chart).

America’s car industry, then, is on the frontline of Mr Trump’s trade war—ostensibly its beneficiary, but also its victim. A tour of factories and watering holes across Michigan’s car country reveals plenty of support for Mr Trump’s aims. The UAW, a big union, recently endorsed his stance on trade. Near the F-150 plant, a white-collar autoworker confides over a beer that she thinks Mr Trump’s policies are justified, even if they cause a bit of pain for her industry, because of Chinese protectionism and theft of intellectual property. Ron Harbour of Oliver Wyman, a consultancy, believes that “the president will come out with fair and equitable agreements.”

But even bosses sympathetic to Mr Trump’s stated goals remain perplexed by his tactics. A survey conducted for this newspaper by the University of Michigan found that the metals tariffs are hurting the state’s car-parts firms. “All prices are going up,” says a supplier of valves. A steel-mill owner expects to charge customers more and urges those with cash to “carry some inventory”. A machine builder who uses lots of steel fears that higher costs could make his clients less competitive, crimping their production and in turn demand for his product—a “downward spiral for us and our customers”.

Travel up Ford’s supply chain from the Dearborn plant, and the vulnerabilities become apparent. Flex-n-Gate, a large maker of car parts, has invested $160m in gleaming plant in a depressed part of east Detroit specifically to serve Ford trucks. “Costs have gone up dramatically,” complains its boss. Get off the Edsel Ford Freeway, meander past boarded-up churches, burned-out warehouses and a Dollar Store, and you arrive at Goodwill Automotive, which has made simple parts for Ford and others for decades. Its managers confirm that prices for steel inputs are up and its suppliers are scrambling to secure stock before they rise further. A crew leader sounds baffled by Mr Trump’s actions: “Why fix something that’s not broken?”

Drive a few hours to Grand Blanc, a suburb of Flint, and you find another Ford supplier with a story to tell. MacArthur Corporation makes permanent labels “for almost every vehicle sold in America”. Tom Barrett, a former Wall Street man, returned to his father’s firm and helped save it when the Lehman collapse pushed the auto industry to the brink a decade ago. He is again worried. He discerns an inflationary pressure not seen since the 1970s. Besides tools and hard dyes made of steel, the price of polypropylene film, which is derived from petroleum, is going up. So is the cost of paper, adhesives and freight. The firm has been unable to pass the increases on to big clients. “They are in cost-cutting mode, delaying planned investments, imposing travel bans and offshoring large non-manufacturing departments,” he says. “It’s like the early days of the Great Recession.”

Carmakers are indeed feeling the squeeze. General Motors (GM) confirmed recently that tariff-fuelled increases in commodity prices led to $300m in extra expenses last quarter, compared with the same period in 2017. Ford has reported that tariffs cost it $145m in the second quarter and forecast that trade tensions may cost $500m-600m this year. For consumers, Mr Trump’s trade policies could inflate the price of a typical small car by between $1,408 and $2,057, according to the Peterson Institute.

That is because the industry is a paean to globalisation. Roughly half the cars sold in America today are imported. Of those made at home, nearly half are made by foreign firms. All American carmakers depend on imported parts and cars. Only Chinese marques can afford to shrug about escalating tensions, ironic given Mr Trump’s China-bashing. Besides a large factory in South Carolina which makes Volvos (owned by China’s Geely), Chinese firms neither export cars to America nor make them there.

The nightmare scenario for carmakers is Mr Trump’s threatened blanket tariff on cars, combined with the collapse of NAFTA. Mexico and Canada account for roughly half of all American auto imports. America’s trade in cars and parts with the two has risen fourfold under NAFTA. GM depends on imports from Mexico and Canada especially for its highly profitable trucks and sports utility vehicles (SUVs). Even Ford, which is moving out of low-margin saloons often made abroad in order to focus on SUVs and pickups like the F-150, has reason to worry. Like GM, it has started bringing manufacturing and suppliers back from Asia to North America. This might help in a global trade war—but not in the event of NAFTA’s collapse, because most relocated to Mexico or Canada.

NAFTA talks have made progress (see article). But success is not in the bag. If Mexico and Canada are slapped with the 25% tariff, a typical model assembled in America with 40% of its parts imported from those two countries would see supply-chain costs leap by over $1.1bn, to $19bn, according to LLamasoft, an analytics firm.

The ultimate cost could be higher still. The supply-chain boss of a global carmaker says his firm has prepared for NAFTA’s demise. It would quickly unwind its current cross-border supply chains, which give it leverage over competing suppliers across North America. It would shift to local suppliers in Mexico for its Mexican plants, American suppliers for American plants and the same in Canada. Prices would inevitably go up, he says. With fewer rivals, vendors would gain pricing power. “My worry is oligopoly,” he says.

His sense of fretfulness is shared. Every summer industry bigwigs and their families gather in Traverse City, a pleasant town on the shores of Lake Michigan. The nominal theme of this year’s gathering, organised by the Centre for Automotive Research, an industry think-tank, was the future of mobility. The skunk at the garden party was the trade war.

What’s good for GM

Some insiders remained upbeat. Sales, especially of trucks and SUVs, are still strong in America; trade deals may yet be struck between the White House and other governments. Others worried that a senseless trade war would tip the industry into recession and force a massive redirection of investment from driverless cars to a defensive rejigging of supply chains. In a rare show of unity, industry associations representing domestic and foreign carmakers, parts suppliers and car dealers have jointly protested against Mr Trump’s trade policies. One insider sums up the mood in Detroit with characteristic midwestern understatement: “Everyone is analysing exposure, everyone is concerned.”
