Why Mitsubishi’s new regional jet shouldn’t be written off yet

The company has grand ambitions in the aerospace industry

https://cdn.static-economist.com/sites/default/files/20180721_WBP501.jpg

A VISITOR to last week’s Farnborough Air Show, held just south-west of London, could easily have been wowed by the variety of military equipment and aircraft on display. But when it comes to large civil airliners, they would be hardly impressed by the choice on offer. In the weeks prior to the show Airbus and Boeing, two big planemakers, tightened their duopoly position in the industry. Airbus of Europe relaunched Bombardier C-Series jet as the A220, after buying half the programme from the ailing Canadian firm on July 1st. Boeing, in response, announced a joint-venture with Embraer, a competitor from Brazil. Together the two moves mean that virtually all the world’s planes with more than 100 seats are built by the two giants. Manufacturers in Russia and China have attempted to move into this market but are struggling to sell to airlines outside their home countries. And so many in the industry are looking to Mitsubishi Heavy Industries, a Japanese conglomerate, as the next hope for a new competitor in planemaking.

At this year’s Farnborough Air Show, the company made baby steps into the industry. The company’s new regional jet that can sit up to 90 people, Japan’s first new airliner since the 1960s, flew in public for the first time (although a second sortie had to be cancelled when it was hit by a truck on the taxiway). That is not the only problem that has beset the programme. The plane will have been delayed seven years if it enters service in 2020 as Mitsubishi currently estimates. Aerospace analysts say that the jet will be in a weaker position against rival aircraft produced by Bombardier and Embraer, now that they have the financial and logistical backing of Airbus and Boeing.

Shunichi Miyanaga, the company’s president and chief executive, admits that it will take a long time to recoup the investment put into the aircraft. But the aircraft should not be seen as a one-off. Facing competition from cheaper Chinese manufacturers, the company needs to shift its focus away from less profitable activities, such as shipbuilding, and into higher tech ones that command a higher premium, such as the development and assembly of complete airlines. Mr Miyanaga, it seems, hopes that his regional jet will be the start of a string of Japanese airliners made by Mitsubishi in the decades to come.

Such grand ambitions should not be laughed off. The Mitsubishi Regional Jet is of a much higher quality than China’s attempt to develop something similar, the ARJ-21, a disaster of an aircraft that the country’s own regulators forbid from flying in the rain for safety reasons. The Japanese conglomerate has low levels of debts and reasonable profits in its other divisions to sustain the losses made by its aerospace arm. And the company already has some scale as a major producer of airliner parts for its giant rivals. Airlines, always looking for ways to ensure Airbus and Boeing are kept honest when it comes to competition, eagerly hope Mitsubishi can take off as a planemaker in the years to come. And passengers, who benefit from lower fares as the result of competition, should too.