
 #### But the move will do noth to help security
 AMERICANS, and people who travel to America, have good reason to celebrate thi month. By the end of April, the four major credit-card network in the country will all stop requir <span class="fa fa-info-circle">retailer</span> to collect signatur from <span class="fa fa-info-circle">customer</span> when <span class="fa fa-info-circle">complet</span> transactions. Visa, the world’ bigg credit-card issu announc in January that signatur would no long be requir from month for <span class="fa fa-info-circle">retailer</span> in North America with chip card readers. For Mastercard, the world’ second largest, the same change became effective on April 13th, <span class="fa fa-info-circle">cover</span> purchas in the Unit Stat and Canada. American Express, in third place globally, i <span class="fa fa-info-circle">dropp</span> the <span class="fa fa-info-circle">signature</span> requirement thi month for <span class="fa fa-info-circle">retailer</span> around the world. Discover, the fourth, i do so in the Unit States, Canada, Mexico, and the Caribbean.
 
 Although <span class="fa fa-info-circle">retailer</span> will have the option of continu to make <span class="fa fa-info-circle">customer</span> sign, many have signall they will not do so. Big retail chain such a Walmart and Target have said they will put an end to signatures. Mark Horwedel, the chief executive of the Merchant Advisory Group, which represent major American retailers, told the New York Times, a newspaper, that he expect around 75% to do away with signatur by the end of 2018. Already, the credit-card compan do not require signatur for transaction und a certain amount, but soon at most stor they will be gone altogether.
 
 For <span class="fa fa-info-circle">traveller</span> to these countries, the move i good news. The random scribbl that are appl to receipt and digital screen have long ceas to protect <span class="fa fa-info-circle">purchaser</span> from fraud. All they real do i slow down the check-out process, <span class="fa fa-info-circle">caus</span> long lin and <span class="fa fa-info-circle">rais</span> cost for retailers.
 
 But to Europeans, the new will sure seem slight puzzling. All the way back in 1994, Visa, Mastercard, and Europay develop a standard for credit card with a comput chip. Soon chip-and-PIN purchas were common acros Europe. Rath than verify their identit with a signature, <span class="fa fa-info-circle">customer</span> insert their chip card into <span class="fa fa-info-circle">reader</span> and then ente secret PIN codes.
 
 But a The Verge, a new website, ha documented, America resist the change. Fraud wa not terrib common, but magnetic-strip credit card were everywhere, and it would have been complicat and expensive to replace them with chip cards. (Thi will sound familiar to anyone who <span class="fa fa-info-circle">wonder</span> why America ha not join the r of the world in <span class="fa fa-info-circle">adopt</span> the metric system.) It wa not until 2015 that Visa and Mastercard start penalis issue who did not put chip in their cards, <span class="fa fa-info-circle">caus</span> American <span class="fa fa-info-circle">final</span> to <span class="fa fa-info-circle">adopt</span> them.
 
 The move thi month away from chip-and-signature do not imp a switch to the more secure chip-and-PIN. Instead, America will <span class="fa fa-info-circle">adopt</span> chip-and-, well, nothing. The announcement by the credit-card issue to drop the <span class="fa fa-info-circle">signature</span> requirement i an admission that signatur did not real prevent fraud. But they do not purport that <span class="fa fa-info-circle">abandon</span> them mak the safer. Once American have grown accustom to the spe and convenience of mak credit card transaction without any sort of identity verification, it might become a lot hard to persuade them to <span class="fa fa-info-circle">adopt</span> the more time-consuming—but more secure—chip-and-PIN system.
 
 Still, relative to the current system, the change will be a welcome one for anyone do busine in the Unit States. Just be sure to check your credit-card statement <span class="fa fa-info-circle">periodical</span> to make sure that no purchas appear on them that are not your own. A in so many things, there’ a price to convenience.
