Karunanidhi, an Indian political giant, passes

But his legacy of celebrity, welfarism and regional pride is as relevant as ever

https://cdn.static-economist.com/sites/default/files/images/2018/08/articles/main/20180811_asp501.jpg

HE WAS never one to go quietly into the night, not even after losing his voice and expiring two years later on a hospital bed at the age of 94. Within hours of dying, on the evening of August 7th, Muthuvel Karunanidhi had inspired yet another hysterical courtroom fight—to decide where his corpse might be buried. Within 24 hours of winning that final battle his supporters had mustered throngs of cheering, sobbing men and women to attend the glorious, raucous cortège out to Marina Beach, where the Bay of Bengal laps up against Chennai. Two of them perished in the crush.

Chennai, the capital of the state of Tamil Nadu, had been Madras until 1996, when Mr Karunanidhi had it renamed in a spurt of Tamil-nationalist pride, during one of his five stints as chief minister. Indeed, Tamil Nadu had been Madras State until he and his mentor had it renamed in 1969. During his lifetime, the whole of the Tamil world was turned upside down, thanks in large part to his efforts and those of his comrades. A combination of fiery passions and organisational discipline gave his intensely regional politics the power to shake the rest of India. The prime minister, Narendra Modi; the head of the opposition Congress party, Rahul Gandhi; and nearly every other heavyweight: all boarded flights from Delhi and beyond to pay their respects to a figure whom their parties had alternately embraced and denounced, over the 60 years he spent in politics.

The longer Tamil drama, with its inbred rivalries and appeals to social justice, tends to remain opaque to the rest of the country. What cut a clearer image was the zaniness of its larger-than-life personalities. Mr Karunanidhi was a former screenwriter, a poet—he was always referred to as “Kalaignar”, the artist—and a wearer of colossal sunglasses. The second-to-last of his epic generation, Jayaram Jayalalithaa, a matinée goddess turned chief minister of Tamil Nadu, had died in December 2016, at 68. Mr Karunanidhi had thus outlived his last and greatest enemy. Now they are buried almost side by side, with another deceased film star and chief minister, M.G. Ramachandran, for company. All had complicated love lives, and all fell in and out with one another—much as their parties did with Congress and with Mr Modi’s Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP).

Their political careers all sprang from the same source, the Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (DMK) and its offshoots. Theirs was the 20th century story of Dravidian liberation. It began with the great social leader Periyar and became political under Annadurai, who tutored Mr Karunanidhi in turn. Its ideology continues to resonate among Tamil-speakers, and to some extent too among the peoples of the neighbouring states that make up the rest of south India.

Devotion to leaders reflects a sense of social identity. The Dravidians, as opposed to the “Aryan” people of north India who speak Indo-European languages, regard themselves as having been shunted aside, in both ancient history and in the modern India forged by Jawaharlal Nehru, Mahatma Gandhi and the rest of its north Indian founders. Defiance of the north is expressed in the defence of Tamil and other regional languages against the imposition of Hindi, and also in the rejection of caste (and of Brahmin power in particular), which Dravidian ideologues regard as a curse foisted upon the country by Aryans. The DMK pioneered caste-based affirmative action and other social programmes, often forcefully, that changed the lives of every Tamil. Some schemes, like midday meals at government schools, went on to set standards for the rest of the country. Under Jayalalithaa, this took a turn for the embarrassing, such as when freebies started to be given away at great cost to the public purse. During the DMK’s last turn in federal power, some of its senior leaders were indicted for corruption in the “2G spectrum” scandal, which cost India billions of dollars. One was Mr Karunanidhi’s daughter, Kanimozhi, who was eventually acquitted.

Jayalalithaa’s death led to chaos within her party, the AIADMK: it still controls the government but looks hollowed-out compared with the disciplined DMK. That party never fully succumbed to the cult of personality, merely to dynasty: it has in recent years been led by Mr Karunanidhi’s son, M.K. Stalin, born four days before the death of the Soviet ogre. He and his fellow cadres should be well-positioned to capitalise on the vacuum created by Jayalalithaa’s passing.

Film stars still have political dreams. Both Rajinikanth and Kamal Haasan, two of the biggest box-office draws, are hurling themselves into Tamil politics in ways that may yet throw open the old two-party rivalry. Meanwhile, the look of India’s national politics makes Mr Karunanidhi’s legacy look as relevant as ever. “Subnational” pride, caste identity and social welfarism will be at the heart of the 2019 general election, as much as Mr Modi’s election campaign of 2014 had aimed to transcend them. Regional titans for whom Mr Karunanidhi was a model hold the future once again. And the flash and crackle of pure celebrity looks as alluring as ever.