How England surprised everyone at the World Cup

A young squad has defied expectations to reach the semi-finals

https://cdn.static-economist.com/sites/default/files/20180714_BLP509.jpg

WITH the English men’s football team reaching the semi-finals of the World Cup for the first time since 1990, the country is going a bit potty. On July 7th, when England beat Sweden in the quarter-finals, Spotify, a music service, reported 1m streams for “Three Lions”, an anthem from the 1990s which promises that “football’s coming home”. The delirium has been magnified by the fact that the expectations were so low at the start of the competition. Many fans would have been happy for the England team just to improve on its dismal showing at the World Cup of 2014. How did such an unfancied bunch reach the cusp of a first final since 1966?

Four reasons stand out. First is a willingness to tear down the old order. When England’s Football Association (FA) sacked Sam Allardyce, the previous manager, it could easily have appointed a high-profile successor. Instead it promoted Gareth Southgate, who had only two years of experience in the Premier League but three in charge of the national under-21 side. Mr Southgate showed a similar disregard for tradition by easing old hands like Wayne Rooney and Joe Hart out of the team and replacing them with younger, arguably hungrier players who were more suited to his tactical plans. Only France and Nigeria brought more youthful squads to the tournament.

That is linked to the second reason behind the team’s successes: an overhaul of the way that the footballing skills of English youngsters are developed. Germany implemented a similar scheme and its clubs have spent €1bn ($1.17bn) on youth academies since 2001; the senior team duly won the World Cup in 2014. That was the year when the FA unveiled an “England DNA” plan, which aimed to create a consistent technical and tactical curriculum for every potential star. The amount of skills training for academy players has trebled to 10-14 hours a week, according to Matt Crocker, the FA’s head of development. Youngsters are encouraged to think for themselves: Mr Crocker says that the under-17 team that trounced Spain 5-2 in last year’s World Cup final devised their own game-plan. The under-20s won their World Cup last year too. As the 

 noted before the tournament, the current England squad have spent more time playing together as juniors than any previous bunch.

To go with this brave new world was a third, more old-fashioned initiative: practising set-pieces. Before this year England had lost six of seven penalty shoot-outs. Though the data suggest that this was probably due to bad luck, the coaches pored through academic research to find possible solutions. English players now take their time—hasty shooters tend to miss—and decide on their shot before walking to the penalty area. That may have helped them to beat Colombia on penalties in the round-of-16. Mr Southgate has also drilled them on corners and free-kicks, an approach that has proved fruitful, with only three of the side’s 11 goals coming from open play. The coach has little control over the fourth factor: a hefty chunk of good fortune. A loss against Belgium in the group stage (a match in which England did not put out their best team) put England into the weaker half of the draw, with a favourable quarter-final tie against Sweden. Croatia in the semi-final will be a formidable opponent, but not as daunting as either France or Belgium, who played the other semi-final. “Three Lions” could get a few more plays yet.