The EU’s ombudsman criticises the appointment of a key German

Martin Selmayr’s elevation as secretary-general of the European Commission was a “manipulation of the rules”, she finds

https://cdn.static-economist.com/sites/default/files/images/2018/09/articles/main/20180908_eup504.jpg

“IT IS much safer to be feared than loved” if one wants to hold onto power, Machiavelli famously advised rulers. Martin Selmayr, the top European bureaucrat in Brussels, evinces both emotions in his colleagues. But his aura is cracking. He is still unloved and, to judge from his latest setbacks, less feared. 

In February Mr Selmayr was controversially manoeuvred into the job of secretary-general of the European Commission, the most senior role in the EU’s civil service. It involved a strange two-step. Mr Selmayr, who had been serving as chief of staff to Jean-Claude Juncker, the commission’s president, was promoted first to deputy secretary-general and then instantly into the top job. There was minimal consultation with other commissioners.

In April, though, the European Parliament cried foul, calling the move a “coup-like action which stretched and possibly even overstretched the limits of the law”. And on September 4th, the European Ombudsman, an independent body tasked with holding up standards of administration in European institutions, added its voice to such concerns.

After finding four instances of maladministration in the elevation of Mr Selmayr, the ombudsman, Emily O’Reilly, condemned the appointment as a “manipulation of the rules” intended to convey an impression that the process was fair and correct, when in fact it was neither. “Citizens are entitled to expect all EU institutions to follow the rule of law, in spirit and letter,” wrote Ms O’Reilly. If it fails to respect the rules, she added, “the Commission risks damaging its own legitimacy.”

So far, so damning. Accused of giving responses that were “defensive, evasive and at times combative”, the commission offered more of the same. It said it had provided “unprecedented transparency” in the case, sending more than 11,000 pages of material to the ombudsman. The commission also pointed to polls showing that trust in the EU is at the highest level since 2010—and higher than trust in national governments and parliaments. The latest quarterly Eurobarometer survey, published in June, found that 42% of Europeans said they “tend to trust” the European Union (the commission, though, tends to keep mum about the finding that 48% tend not to trust the EU).

Trust can be fragile and, once broken, hard to repair. The Selmayr saga exposes the EU to accusations of hypocrisy at a time when it is struggling against the forces of populism. Italy, once one of the most pro-EU member states, has become one of the most sceptical; its all-populist government is set to clash with the commission over fiscal targets and migrants. In Hungary, the subject of EU criticism over the weakening of the rule of law, trust in the EU is falling. In Poland, where the EU is engaged in a difficult dispute over judicial appointments and dismissals, only 46% trust the EU. The controversy over its own appointments might have made the commission task all the harder.

The promotion of Mr Selmayr could affect the contest for the top European jobs that come up for grabs next year. Germany has given up the battle to elevate its Bundesbank president, Jens Weidmann, to president of the European Central Bank. It is possible that Angela Merkel will push for a German commission president instead. Manfred Weber, the German leader of the centre-right European People’s Party group in the parliament, this week launched his campaign for the job. The trouble is that with Mr Selmayr, also German, already running the commission’s bureaucracy, many countries will resist the idea that Germany should also win the presidency of the commission. That may suit Mr Selmayr just fine. If he were picked as president of the commission, the German problem would be solved.