Dara Khosrowshahi’s first year at Uber

He has not yet steered the ride-hailing giant fully on course

https://cdn.static-economist.com/sites/default/files/images/2018/09/articles/main/20180908_blp904.jpg

ON SEPTEMBER 5th Dara Khosrowshahi celebrated his first anniversary in the driver’s seat at Uber. It has been a productive year, but he still has an enormous amount to do. 

Most pressingly, the task of cleaning up Uber’s image, tarnished by a series of serious mishaps that began in January 2017, is only partially complete. The list of scandals facing Mr Khosrowshahi when he arrived as the new chief executive included allegations of sex discrimination by employees, complaints by drivers over declining earnings, a lawsuit over intellectual property (IP), controversial (and probably illegal) software to monitor regulators and more. In 2017 the firm earned so much bad publicity that some of its investors used to feel embarrassed to be seen getting into Uber vehicles.

Mr Khosrowshahi has tackled several of these problems head-on. He has worked to improve employees’ morale and put in place processes for better handling of complaints about discrimination. As the former boss of Expedia, an online-travel firm, he has experience of running a big company and has changed Uber’s casual, rule-bending culture. He resolved the lawsuit from Waymo, Alphabet’s self-driving car unit, which alleged that Uber stole intellectual property.

His contrite style, which stands in contrast to that of Travis Kalanick, his sharp-clawed predecessor (Uber’s co-founder), has gone down well with regulators. The firm won a temporary licence in June to operate in London, the firm’s most lucrative European market, after it had been blocked in September 2017 because of concerns about public safety. In March he sold Uber’s business in South-East Asia to a local competitor, Grab, in exchange for a stake in the firm. It was a sensible move that will help reduce losses and clear the way for a planned initial public offering next year.

Beyond that, for Uber to succeed as a public company, three big challenges need to be faced. One is the intensely competitive nature of the ride-hailing business, which will continue to hit profitability. Since Mr Khosrowshahi took over, Uber has continued to grow, but has ceded market share in America, a key market, to Lyft, a rival. Uber has around 72% of American ride-hailing sales compared with Lyft’s 28%, according to Second Measure, an analytics firm. Uber’s struggles helped Lyft raise money and expand more aggressively.

This has consequences for the longer term. Though Mr Kalanick had hoped that Uber would quickly dominate ride-hailing around the world and enjoy fat profit margins close to those of Google, Mr Khosrowshahi is less sanguine. “Physical transport comes with lower margins,” he says, predicting that Uber will never claim fat “software margins”. So far, Uber has lost more money than any American tech firm of its age in history. In the second quarter of this year it reported $2.8bn of revenue, but lost $891m.

A second challenge will be expanding Uber’s business beyond ride-hailing. Uber runs the largest food-delivery business outside China, called Uber Eats. It is growing quickly but also has low margins and requires lots of capital. The company has also joined forces with Lime, an electric-scooter firm, to offer scooter rides. Earlier this year it bought an electric-bicycle-sharing firm called Jump. Mr Khosrowshahi’s vision is for Uber to become the “Amazon of transport”. Just as Amazon sells other merchants’ goods on its platform, the idea is that Uber will make other firms’ services available through its app. But moving beyond cars invites fresh regulatory challenges and produces more technological complexity.

Third, Uber will need to tackle the question of how much longer it should keep on trying to build its own autonomous-car capabilities. In March a self-driving car operated by Uber killed a pedestrian, raising questions about the reliability of the firm’s technology. But that has not stopped Uber from expending time and money on its self-driving initiative. Last month the company accepted a $500m investment from Toyota to pursue self-driving-car technology. But if Mr Khosrowshahi’s vision is to build a more open platform that other firms can use to offer rides of different sorts, it may not be worth spending billions more to pursue proprietary tech. Perhaps Mr Khosrowshahi will rethink the strategy before his firm goes public. Anniversaries are moments not just for celebration, but also for reflection. 