In the Philippines, Duterte orders the arrest of a prominent critic

Senator Antonio Trillanes has sought sanctuary in the senate building

https://cdn.static-economist.com/sites/default/files/images/2018/09/articles/main/20180908_asp002.jpg

SENATOR ANTONIO TRILLANES, the fiercest of President Rodrigo Duterte’s opponents in congress, was still a free man six days after the president secretly ordered his arrest. But only just. For Mr Trillanes was cooped up in the senate building in Manila, the capital. In theory that gave him sanctuary from arrest by any soldiers or policemen lurking outside, ready to pounce. But the senator is used to confrontation. As a junior naval officer he twice led mutinies against the then political establishment. His present predicament reminds Filipinos of episodes during the tyrannical rule of President Ferdinand Marcos, overthrown 32 years ago. As the opposition sees it, Mr Trillanes’s plight is the clearest sign yet that Mr Duterte is another Marcos in the making.

On August 31st Mr Duterte signed a proclamation that rescinded an amnesty granted to Mr Trillanes in 2010, citing legal technicalities, and ordered his arrest. The amnesty had stopped the prosecution of Mr Trillanes for leading the two mutinies by young officers of the armed forces. On the first occasion, in 2003, they took over a set of upmarket apartments, calling for an end to government corruption. On the second, in 2007, they occupied the lobby of a posh hotel. Nobody was killed. Yet the government regarded the mutinies as attempts to overthrow the then president, Gloria Arroyo. The mutineers therefore faced prosecution until her successor, Benigno Aquino, granted them an amnesty.

Mr Duterte’s edict was made public four days after he signed it, while he was on an official visit to Israel. Mr Trillanes reacted in his usual style, saying: “Mr Duterte, you are a coward. You waited until you left before issuing your proclamation. This is a clear case of political persecution, but I will not cower. A time of reckoning will come for you and your minions.” Mr Trillanes said he would challenge the proclamation in the Supreme Court.

The senator has long been a thorn in Mr Duterte’s side. He has accused the president of hiding unexplained wealth and endorses a statement lodged at the International Criminal Court in The Hague that calls for Mr Duterte to be prosecuted for encouraging the killing of thousands of suspected drug dealers and users. The president’s spokesman denied that Mr Trillanes was being persecuted merely for opposing Mr Duterte, saying that the president was simply upholding the law. “The past has finally caught up with Senator Trillanes,” he said.

Mr Trillanes is not the first prominent critic of Mr Duterte to get in trouble. Senator Leila de Lima is already behind bars, accused of being part of a network of politicians and drug dealers which the president says he is out to destroy. Chief Justice Maria Lourdes Sereno was sacked on a legal technicality after objecting to the war against drugs. But how much Mr Duterte was involved in bringing them down is murky. Ms de Lima was charged by state prosecutors with extorting money from drug dealers when she was justice minister to pay for her campaign for the senate. (She denies this.) In Ms Sereno’s case, it was her own colleagues in the Supreme Court who got rid of her. But many observers find it hard to see anything more than presidential spite in the action against Mr Trillanes.