Islamic State, Israel and the Assad regime square off

As the regime thrusts south, the jihadists retaliate and Israel guards its border

https://cdn.static-economist.com/sites/default/files/images/2018/07/articles/main/20180728_map504.jpg

THE people of Sweida, a city in Syria’s south, near the border with Jordan, had been spared the worst of Syria’s seven-year war. But the relative calm came to a bloody end on July 25th. In one of their deadliest attacks, gunmen and suicide bombers from the Islamic State (IS) group raided targets in and around the city. As many as 250 people were killed as bombs tore through a busy vegetable market and the jihadists fired on homes before making off with hostages. IS has lost most of its territory in Syria, but it is still able to sow chaos in the country.

The attacks have dampened celebrations by the regime of Bashar al-Assad. His forces have driven more mainstream rebels from most of the country’s south, including the city of Deraa, where some of the first protests against his dictatorship erupted in 2011. Government flags now flutter over the region, once called the “cradle of the revolution”. A vital border crossing with Jordan, closed since 2015, is scheduled to reopen within weeks, potentially boosting the war-ravaged economy. Mr Assad’s forces have also reached the border of the buffer zone between Israel and Syria in the Golan Heights. Most of the remaining rebels are now crammed into a corner in north-west Syria.

Mr Assad’s thrust south has raised tensions with Israel. News that the Israelis helped evacuate rescue workers known as the White Helmets enraged the regime, which has absurdly tried to smear members of the group as terrorist collaborators and actors paid by the West to stage chemical attacks.

Israel, which has offered medical assistance to injured rebel fighters, appears to have accepted the return of regime rule in southern Syria—so long as its army respects the 1974 disengagement deal that established a UN-patrolled buffer zone between the two countries. On July 24th Israel made good on its vow to defend its border, shooting down a Syrian fighter jet that it said had entered Israeli airspace. The next day Israeli jets and artillery bombarded the site of a rocket launcher in Syria that apparently (and perhaps errantly) fired two missiles that landed in the Sea of Galilee.

Israel also wants Iranian forces, who support Mr Assad, to withdraw from Syria. Booting out Iran, however, will be far harder than punishing border violations. Israel has enlisted the help of Russia, which has worked with Iran to prop up the regime. Russia has offered to move Iranian-backed forces 100km from the border with Israel, an offer that Binyamin Netanyahu, Israel’s prime minister, has apparently rejected. Even if the Russians embraced Israeli demands for a full Iranian withdrawal many doubt they have enough sway to persuade the Iranians to leave. They and their allies have proven essential in stiffening pro-regime forces on the ground, whereas Russia has mostly conducted an air campaign.

If Iran stays then Israel will continue its covert war inside Syria. Since the start of the conflict Israel has carried out more than 100 strikes in Syria, attacking missile convoys, storage warehouses and military bases linked to Iran and its militias. The frequency of the strikes is increasing. In the first five months of 2018 Israel launched 28 strikes in Syria—more than the entire tally for 2017, according to the Centre for Strategic and International Studies, an American think-tank. Mr Assad may be on track to defeat the rebels, but as one war winds down another is simmering.