Brett Kavanaugh may have fared better with senators than voters

Betting markets took a rollercoaster ride during the hearing into sexual-assault allegations against Donald Trump’s Supreme Court nominee

https://cdn.static-economist.com/sites/default/files/20181006_WOC451.png

SWORN under oath to tell the truth, Christine Blasey Ford said on September 27th that she was “100 percent” certain that Brett Kavanaugh, President Donald Trump’s nominee for the Supreme Court, had sexually assaulted her in 1982. Ms Blasey Ford testified before the Senate Judiciary Committee that she believed Mr Kavanaugh and his friend Mark Judge were going to rape her after they pushed her into a dark room at a small gathering 36 years ago. With equal conviction, Mr Kavanaugh vehemently denied the claims later that day in front of the same panel.

Although television viewership for the hearing was expected to reach perhaps 30m—nearly 10% of the American population—the primary audience for the two protagonists was the small group of senators thought to be undecided about whether to support Mr Kavanaugh. With a narrow 51-49 majority, Republicans can afford only a single defection in order to confirm him (Mike Pence, the vice-president, would cast a tie-breaking vote in his favour in the event of a 50-50 split). Neither Susan Collins nor Lisa Murkowski, both Republicans, have yet said how they would vote.

The collective view of traders in betting markets about that group’s eventual decisions oscillated wildly during the course of the hearing. Both witnesses appear to have helped their causes. Before Ms Blasey Ford entered the room, punters on PredictIt, a popular prediction market focused on American politics, thought Mr Kavanaugh had slightly better than a 50/50 chance of being confirmed. After she was deemed to be credible and convincing even by conservative pundits, investors turned bearish on Mr Kavanaugh’s odds. During the break between her testimony and his, his chances of confirmation fell as low as 36%.

In hindsight, that would have been a wise time to buy. Mr Kavanaugh dispensed with the historical expectation that judicial nominees should appear measured and impartial. Instead, he delivered a blisteringly partisan opening statement, in which he dismissed the accusations against him as motivated by “apparent pent-up anger about President Trump and the 2016 election...revenge on behalf of the Clintons and millions of dollars in money from outside left-wing opposition groups”. By inflaming the political nature of his nomination, he seemed to be banking his hopes of confirmation on a narrow party-line vote.

Investors seemed impressed by Mr Kavanaugh’s defiant strategy. Traders on PredictIt steadily bid up his odds during the course of his testimony, driving them as high as 83% as the hearing wrapped up. This morning Jeff Flake of Arizona—the swing Republican vote on the Senate Judiciary committee—announced his intention to vote for Mr Kavanaugh’s confirmation.

Even if the Republicans do manage to place Mr Kavanaugh on the court, however, they are likely to pay a political price in the mid-term elections due in November. Even before Ms Blasey Ford’s allegations became public, Mr Kavanaugh was unusually divisive for a Supreme Court nominee: according to a poll in early September by The Economist and YouGov, 31% of Americans wanted him confirmed and 29% did not. Of the past ten nominees, the seven who were elevated to the court led in such polls by double-digit margins; neither of the two who had narrower margins, Robert Bork and Harriet Miers, achieved confirmation. Mr Kavanaugh is now in uncharted territory: the latest YouGov poll showed that 33% of respondents support his confirmation and 39% oppose it, making him the first nominee in decades with a negative net rating.

Republicans may well believe that securing a reliable right-wing majority on the Supreme Court, whose justices enjoy lifetime appointments and can overturn any law they deem unconstitutional, is worth the potential electoral price. If they succeed in jamming Mr Kavanaugh through, the cost in terms of legislative seats will soon become clear.