The hazards of updating classic texts

A scorned production of “Tartuffe”, set in modern Los Angeles, holds important lessons for directors

https://cdn.static-economist.com/sites/default/files/20180602_BLP532.jpg

THE Theatre Royal Haymarket’s production looked so promising on paper. “Tartuffe”, Moliére’s masterly lampoon of courtly vanity and hypocrisy, seemed fit for relocation to 21st-century Los Angeles. A satire involving an evangelical impostor who infiltrates the household of a gullible nobleman, the plot neatly transposes to a place where “a vulnerability to strange and rapacious belief systems” remains “endemic”, as Christopher Hampton, the translator, puts it in the programme notes. Along with Gerald Garutti, the director and a 

 in French at Cambridge University, Mr Hampton brought experience and brainpower to what looked to be an intellectually high-octane affair, with an innovative bilingual format. As the victims of Tartuffe’s faux-religious snake-oil scam learn, however, an appearance of gravitas and sagacity can be misleading. “Merde”, wrote one especially disgruntled critic of the “extraordinarily self-defeating” performance; “what a mess”. Rarely is such a distinguished creative team so universally panned. 

Many reviewers focused on the toe-curlingly bad final sequence, which rendered Moliére’s king as Donald Trump with an unsubtlety befitting the president himself. The production, however, was already in the coffin before the clanging Mar-a-Lago joke inserted the final nail. Doubtless, rabid hatchet jobs make for entertaining reading. But a more cool-headed post-mortem, attempting to discern the precise cause of this production’s death, reveals the hazards involved in attempting to translate and update classic plays. 

The translation is the first problem. Marketing materials for the show made much of its claim to be the first bilingual production on a West End stage (there have been others elsewhere in London), with English surtitles for the French sections and vice-versa. This would be an admirable accolade, were it not for a suspicion that the dearth of such performances can be explained by the fact that they rarely work very well. Besides, the tortuous backstory required to explain a family of characters communicating in two languages is too knotty to be intuitively grasped. Consulting the programme notes again, we learn that Orgon, the credulous billionaire conned by Tartuffe, is an ex-pat Frenchman “whose children, brought up in Anglophone countries, are entirely bilingual, and who is obliged to speak English to an apparently monoglot house guest”. 

If you manage to follow all of that, you’ll still have to contend with the constant, jarring shifts between ten-syllable English lines of blank verse, and 12-syllable Alexandrine French. The Alexandrine line is unwieldy at the best of times, although Claude Perron handles it with admirable panache as the fierce housemaid Dorine in this version, confidently stretching out the throaty vowels of “j’enrage” and “gloire”. But the clunking gear changes between two metrical forms make it hard to build up a rhythm in either. Contemporary English in blank verse can sound laboured (“Why, if you approve of my advances / Deny to me definitive credentials?” runs a particularly tinny pair of lines). In a final layer of confusion, the English lines and surtitles are peppered with 21st-century references to Advil, limousines and bikini tops, while the 17th-century French is mostly left alone. Consequently, the audience is left to rapidly apprehend different historical eras, as well as languages and metrical forms—a tall order.

Bilingual adaptations of classic plays can work, if handled carefully. Thomas Ostermeier’s electrifying Shakespearean creations at the Barbican theatre in London used a German translation and English surtitles, with occasional switches into English for ad-libs and soliloquys. Unlike this “Tartuffe”, Mr Ostermeier’s polyglot scripts enhanced underlying aspects of the plays and their use of different registers. It felt perfectly natural that Hamlet or Richard III should switch to an audience’s vernacular in order to communicate privately with them. The familiarity of English audiences with the basic gist of Shakespeare’s plays also helped; Moliére’s work is far less well-known.

The second issue with “Tartuffe”, along with the disjointed translation, was the garbled dramaturgy. An imposing, monumental box took centre stage, fronted by glass that could be changed from clear to cloudy at the flick of a switch, hiding and revealing the actors inside. The novelty of this theatrical toy quickly wore off, mostly because in a more-or-less naturalistic staging, it didn’t function in any way remotely similar to a normal room. As a result, some of the play’s best scenes were squandered—notably the sequence in which Tartuffe attempts to seduce Orgon’s wife atop a kitchen table while her hapless husband hides beneath. In Mr Garutti’s staging, the three pointlessly circled in and out of the box, robbing the scene of its transgressive punch. 

As with bilingual scripts, restagings that alter the dramatic rationale of the original need not be so hollow. In his “Hamlet” at the Almeida theatre last year, Robert Icke upended a famous scene in which Hamlet eavesdrops on his murderous uncle, Claudius, confessing his crimes in prayer. Typically, Hamlet lurks in a corner, unnoticed. Mr Icke placed him directly in front of Claudius, turning the dramatic logic of the scene on its head: was this Claudius a figment of Hamlet’s imagination? Critics were divided on the newly ambiguous staging, but agreed that it provocatively pried open a well-worn moment. 

Coincidentally, another version of “Tartuffe” is being produced by Anil Gupta, Richard Pinto and the Royal Shakespeare Company later this year, relocating the action to Birmingham’s Muslim community. Iqbal Khan, the director, was unfazed by the media mauling of the Theatre Royal Haymarket’s take. “There’s always a sense of apprehension about trying to translate these great pieces for modern audiences,” he said, “and that would be there whether this other version had happened or not”. Mr Khan reassures that he has “tried to honour the dramaturgical structure” of the play, while “being bold about allowing ourselves to depart from it when we need to”. Ultimately, he says, “I feel what we’re doing has real integrity.” Such noble aims are welcome. A careful look at predecessors’ mistakes may well be important, too. 