Despite Woods’s charge, the PGA was Brooks Koepka’s to lose

The crowd favourite was a long-shot to win, but has re-established his bona fides

TIGER is back. At 42 years old and bearing the scars from four different back surgeries, his sceptics could be forgiven for doubting whether Tiger Woods, the world’s best-known and most popular golfer, would ever contend for a title again. Yet Mr Woods has demonstrated emphatically that even if he is a pale imitation of the player he was at his peak, his late-career incarnation is still good enough to beat most of today’s elite players. At the Open Championship in Carnoustie, Scotland, Mr Woods briefly held the lead on the tournament’s final day, before finishing an impressive sixth out of 155 players. He followed up on that performance with a riveting showing on August 12th in the last round of the PGA Championship, the year’s final major. Despite struggling mightily off the tee—he failed to hit the fairway on any of the first nine holes—Mr Woods shot a sizzling 64, thanks to remarkable iron play and lights-out putting. He finished the event in sole possession of second place, two strokes behind the victor, Brooks Koepka.

As Mr Woods notched birdie after birdie, staying right on Mr Koepka’s heels from start to finish, it seemed like he needed only one small dash of good fortune to secure his first major title in over a decade. In fact, Mr Woods always faced daunting odds. Starting his Sunday four strokes back of Mr Koepka, EAGLE, The Economist’s live-updating win-probability model, gave Mr Woods just a 3.5% chance of winning the tournament as the final round began. Even after Mr Woods had narrowed the gap to a single stroke by shooting three under par on the front nine, EAGLE only saw him as a one-in-ten shot to win. At that point, Thomas Pieters and Justin Thomas were also tied with Mr Koepka for the lead, and the dangerous Jon Rahm and Adam Scott lurked just a stroke behind Mr Woods.

The crowd favourite’s lone gasp of a legitimate breath of victor’s air came after he drained two more birdies on the 12th and 13th holes. That left him one stroke back of Mr Koepka, and at least one ahead of everyone else. At that high-water mark, EAGLE assigned him a robust 24% chance of victory. Even then, however, it saw Mr Koepka as the heavy favourite, with a 62% win probability. Not only did the leader have a one-stroke advantage on Mr Woods, but Mr Koepka had also played two fewer holes than Mr Woods had. That meant he had two additional opportunities to gain further ground, on a course playing far easier than its mix of pars and hole distances would suggest. (In EAGLE’s estimation, Mr Koepka, the winner of the past two US Opens, is also a slightly superior golfer to the late-vintage version of Mr Woods: facing average course conditions, EAGLE expects Mr Koepka to complete the 72 holes of a major tournament in about one fewer stroke than it does for Mr Woods.)

Never again would Mr Woods even sniff a shot at his fifth Wanamaker Trophy: a bogey on the par-4 14th hole sent him tumbling down the win-probability chart. Fortunately for spectators, the tournament retained its suspense thanks to Mr Scott, Mr Koepka’s playing partner. Just as Mr Woods faded, Mr Scott holed a pair of birdies to vault him into a tie for first. But even with the final group equal at 14 under par and just four holes left to play, EAGLE gave Mr Koepka the edge, with a 46% win probability to Mr Scott’s 39%. Fans hoping for a photo finish had to leave empty-handed, as Mr Koepka responded with birdies of his own on the 15th and 16th holes to lock in his third major championship in the past 14 months.

After beating all but one of the world’s best players, Mr Woods has already proved the naysayers wrong. If he can manage to get his long game back in sync, he will rightly be among the favourites in upcoming events. Following his strong performance at the PGA Championship, EAGLE now projects Mr Woods to shoot around 2.7 strokes above par per 72 holes on a major course of average difficulty, ranking 15th in the world. That corresponds to around a 2% chance of winning each major he enters at this level of performance.

Jack Nicklaus should still probably rest easy: Mr Woods needs four more major titles to tie the Golden Bear’s all-time record of 18. Even if Mr Woods managed to stave off further age-related decline indefinitely, he would still need to play for 45 more years to be expected to tie Mr Nicklaus’s mark. But if he can keep this up until he is 50 or so, then there is about a 50% chance that he can add at least one more major trophy to his case.
