Bernard Lewis was the doyen of Orientalists

The scholar of Islam and the Middle East died on May 19th, aged 101

WHETHER he was drinking tea with Arab royalty or discussing his books on Islam with an American audience, Bernard Lewis was a bridge between the Muslim world and the West. He saw himself as a latter-day dragoman, referring to the Ottoman-era interpreters who mediated talks between Turkish, Arabic and Persian rulers and European governments.

Mr Lewis, who died on May 19th, grew up in a north London suburb, the son of Jewish middle-class parents who would have preferred him to be a lawyer. But his passion for history and knack for languages (he spoke 15, including Hebrew, Arabic, Persian and Turkish) made him better equipped to tutor political officers managing the British empire’s Middle East mandates. He taught Islamic studies, first at London University’s School of Oriental and African Studies and then, from the 1970s, at Princeton University in America.

With over two dozen books to his name, Mr Lewis was hailed as the West’s pre-eminent historian of Islam. “The Arabs in History”, an early work, remains a primer for students 70 years after its publication. Two of his books became American best-sellers and he the first Western scholar to be given access to the archives of the Sublime Porte in Istanbul. But he shunned the ivory tower. A charmer, he wrote fondly of teas and lunches with the Shah of Iran on his Peacock throne, with the last king of Afghanistan, with Jordan’s King Hussein and with the then-prime minister of Israel, Golda Meir. He dedicated a book to one of his lovers, Perizad, an Ottoman princess and great-granddaughter of Sultan Mehmet V. “To the Princess, [with] the glory of the past and the promise of the future,” he wrote in Ottoman Turkish.

It was the present he struggled with. He railed against the anti-American revolutions that overtook Iran and Afghanistan and saw catastrophe in the Arab spring of 2011. His world view grew increasingly reactionary, nostalgic and bitter. In the build-up to the Iraq war he championed democracy. “Either we bring them freedom, or they destroy us,” he said. But as America’s invasion soured, he warned against too heavy a dose. Jordan’s absolute monarchy was as good a model as the Middle East could expect, he said. Free and fair elections in the region were “lunacy”.

Often he spoke in the imperious tones of a British foreign-intelligence officer, which he was during the second world war. Some thought he sounded, too, like a jilted lover. He never forgave Arab regimes for banning him from the region on account of his Jewish roots. (He kept a flat in Tel Aviv, overlooking the Mediterranean, and chose to be buried in Israel.)

Arab academics, foremost among them Edward Said, a Palestinian, ridiculed him as an agent of American imperialism. “The whole point of his exposition”, Said wrote in his seminal work, “Orientalism”, “is to frighten his audience, to make it never yield an inch to Islam.” Mr Lewis coined the term “clash of civilisations” to highlight the West’s stormy ties with Islam. His book “Semites and Anti-Semites” depicts Islam as anti-Jewish from its inception. After the attacks of September 11th he became a mentor of neoconservatives in Washington as they prepared to invade Iraq (though he subsequently said he would have done things differently in Iraq). Israeli hardliners, such as Binyamin Netanyahu, the current prime minister, feted him. Islamophobes cheered when he warned that Islam would take over Europe.

Mr Lewis, whose career spanned 80 years, had an endless supply of anecdotes to spice up his messages. But his delight in the past left him out of joint with the present. He ranted against vacillating Western governments that lacked the muscle of their colonial forebears. “It is important to be clear and unequivocal, to let [Muslims] know what we mean and that we mean what we say,” he said in one of his last interviews. Mr Lewis’s historical research will be revered for generations. His policy assessments will probably not. 