A new take on “Swan Lake”

The production of the beloved ballet by Liam Scarlett is the Royal Ballet’s first in 30 years

GIVEN the necessary investment of time, talent and money, a new production of “Swan Lake” for a ballet company is a once-in-a-generation event. The Royal Ballet had lived with its previous production, devised by Anthony Dowell, since 1987; it decided to change it only when the clamour for something new—fresh designs, a shift in perspective—became too strong to resist. 

The project demanded a director-choreographer young enough to have bright ideas and the energy to push them through, but experience enough to have a deep respect for tradition. It was no time for radical experiment. “Swan Lake” is the world’s best-loved ballet, and this version would be required to showcase one of the world’s most admired ballet companies. It would also need to earn its keep for the next 30 years. No pressure, then.

Liam Scarlett, just 32, ticked all the boxes. The Royal Ballet’s first artist in residence, he has choreographic credits as long as your arm, though none from reworking existing ballets. One criticism of the company’s previous “Swan Lake” concerned a perceived mismatch of its busy, Fabergé-inspired designs and its coolly restrained dramatic handling. So Mr Scarlett’s first job was to work closely with his designer, John Mcfarlane, to create a cohesive look and feel.

The setting remains the mid-1890s—when “Swan Lake” first took flight—but now Prince Siegfried’s birthday celebrations are held on a lawn framed by cedars, a landscape that melts away to reveal Act Two’s monochrome lakeside, all inky shadows and Turner-esque moon. (There is no dry ice, which may be a world first in a production of this ballet). The swan’s tutus, too, have sharper edges: gone are the flowing gauzy skirts, hated by many for showing so little of the dancers’ legs. The new tutus are super-short and wide. They’d gash your cheek if they brushed past you in your seat.

Mr Scarlett has made some minor tweaks to the drama, too. The troubled prince has acquired two sisters, and his long-suffering friend Benno (gone AWOL in the previous production) has been restored. He and the sisters make more sense of the famous trio in Act One, which used to be danced by anonymous locals and felt like a diversion from the story.

Perhaps inspired by Matthew Bourne’s “Swan Lake” (first staged at Sadler’s Wells in 1995), Mr Scarlett gives the ageing Queen a companion: a saturnine, scheming advisor who reappears, transformed, as the swans’ evil controller in the lakeside scenes. He reveals his true deviousness in human form at the palace ball. Far from the generic gothic monster seen in many productions, this Von Rothbart is a truly malign presence, and his puppeteering control of the massed swans is clearly visible in their movements. The two “White Acts” take their cue from Lev Ivanov’s 1895 choreography but reformulate the swan’s dances to make new shapes on the stage, mostly avoiding straight lines. This is a production, indeed, that pays dividends to those in the cheaper seats at the top of the house. To be fully appreciated, those patterns have to be seen from above.

It’s in Acts Three and Four that Mr Scarlett exerts the most obvious influence, re-choreographing all but one of the national dances (he hasn’t touched Frederick Ashton’s sparky Neapolitan—perhaps he didn’t dare) and inserting a mordant change of mood at the ballet’s dénouement.

What, in the end, is it that keeps audiences and critics coming back to “Swan Lake” time after time? It is partly the ballet’s offer of a ravishing frame for individual talents. The six couples scheduled to dance the leads will each offer different qualities and subtly distinct interpretations. Marianela Nunez was the Swan Queen of choice on opening night, but other principals and partnerings have their fans.

As a framework, then, Messrs Scarlett and Macfarlane’s new “Swan Lake” does the job, and magnificently too. The jury is still out, however, on whether it ultimately takes its audience on a similarly thrilling emotional rollercoaster. The new ending—no spoilers here—has been deemed just right for the 21st century. But it’s whether audiences continue to find resonance in this curious anthropomorphic tale about the human longing for rapture and transcendence that will determine the fate of the Royal Ballet’s investment.