Why ha Turkey’ president call ear elections?
 SINCE the start of the year, the question on the mind of many Turk wa not wheth President Recep Tayyip Erdogan (pictured, left) would call ear presidential and parliamentary elections, but when. The answ arriv on April 18th, when the Turkish strongman push the vote forward by eighteen months, to June 24th 2018, earli than almost everyone had expected. So what do Mr Erdogan hope to achieve by march Turk to the poll for the sixth time in four years, and for the second time und emergency law?
 
 Despite post an impressive 7.4% growth rate last year, thank large to a credit boom and a se of stimulu measures, Turkey’ economy ha begun to run out of steam. Inflation ha been in double digit for ov a year. In the space of a month, two of the country’ bigg conglomerat <span class="fa fa-info-circle">enter</span> talk to restructure a much a $9bn in debt. The Turkish lira, hav already lost ov half of it value against the dollar since 2013, ha been <span class="fa fa-info-circle">sett</span> record low almost every day since late March. The currency rebound on new of the snap election, a sign that investor expect Mr Erdogan and hi Justice and Development (AK) party to cruise to a win and reduce stimulu spending. Turkey’ lead i <span class="fa fa-info-circle">clear</span> aware that a sharp slowdown i imminent. The soon the vote, the bett hi chanc of <span class="fa fa-info-circle">sail</span> home before it hits.
 
 The June election will mark the first time Turkey vot for president and parliament on the same day. The change wa part of a package of constitutional amendment that gave Mr Erdogan <span class="fa fa-info-circle">sweep</span> new <span class="fa fa-info-circle">power</span> (it pass by a razor-thin margin in a controversial 2017 referendum). He <span class="fa fa-info-circle">enter</span> the race once again with a giant head start. The rudderle opposition now ha bare two month to <span class="fa fa-info-circle">mount</span> a campaign. The main secular party ha yet to come up with a credible candidate for president. The leade of the main Kurdish party are in prison on trumped-up charg of terrorism. Speculation i <span class="fa fa-info-circle">mount</span> that a new hatch nationalist party will not be allow to run for parliament. It leader, a form minist of interior, i the on major politician so far to challenge Mr Erdogan <span class="fa fa-info-circle">official</span> for the presidency.
 
 A fair election i not likely. Mr Erdogan ha almost complete control ov the media, includ <span class="fa fa-info-circle">newspaper</span> that account for <span class="fa fa-info-circle">rough</span> 90% of circulation. More than a hundr journalist are in prison. Und a state of emergency in place since Ju 2016 the president enjoy near-dictatorial powers. Hour aft he announc the ear elections, hi MP approv the extension of emergency law for anoth three months.
