Germany has been slow to reassess its place in the world
Germany’s traditional foreign-policy doctrines are coming under pressure
THERE IS A crack of howitzer fire and a plume of smoke from above the birch trees, then silence falls on the milky winter afternoon in Pabrade, close to Lithuania’s border with Belarus. “There come the Marders!” cries Lieutenant-Colonel Bösker of the Mechanised Infantry Battalion 371 of Germany’s Bundeswehr as four light tanks roll out of the forest. Their job is to lure the enemy into the line of fire of the Leopard heavy tanks, which issue a series of earth-shattering booms. All this action, the lieutenent-colonel explains, is purely defensive: “The point is to slow down the enemy and buy time for political talks.”

The exercise, codenamed “Winter Wolf”, is part of NATO’s “enhanced forward presence” (EFP) in Poland and the Baltic states, a response to Russian aggression in the region. In each of these countries a “framework nation”—in Lithuania’s case, Germany—leads a multinational battalion charged with deterring Russian interference. Until recently such a deployment close to the Russian border would have been unthinkable. The post-war German constitution ruled out any combat deployments of the armed forces, a prohibition that was lifted only in 1994. Between the end of the second world war and 2002, when Germany joined the war in Afghanistan, the number of Germans killed in combat was precisely two. Mr Trump complains that Europe’s largest economy still falls well short of NATO’s target for defence spending of 2% of GDP. But as the Lithuania mission shows, the country is now more engaged.

Across all aspects of Germany’s foreign policy, the country is beginning to give up its cautious traditional doctrines, but much more slowly than many of its allies would like. The country’s role in the world is inevitably coloured by recent history. At NATO’s Lithuanian headquarters in Rukla, a former Soviet army base, Thorsten Gensler is reflecting on his childhood. The EFP battlegroup’s commander grew up in Bavaria, just 4km from the border with East Germany, which he recalls was patrolled by American soldiers. Sometimes they would give out chocolates. “But the threat was there, it was visible,” he says. “And then the Wall fell, and with the expansion of NATO we are surrounded by friends…Here in Lithuania I feel that Germany is now giving back something of what the alliance gave my country in the cold war.” In the nearby mess tent—a little corner of Germany, complete with sausage stand and post office—postcards bearing messages from home are pinned on a board: “My papa, my soldier, my hero”; “Greetings from the Heimat”.

Germany has stepped up its defence effort in recent years. In 2014 Joachim Gauck, then the country’s president, gave a speech at the Munich Security Conference calling on his country to act “sooner, more decisively and more substantially” in the world. Since then Germany has expanded its role in Afghanistan, started arming Kurdish Peshmerga fighters in northern Iraq and increased its peacekeeping role alongside France in Mali. When MH17, a Dutch airliner, was shot down by Russia-backed insurgents in Ukraine just months after Mr Gauck’s speech, Mrs Merkel pushed her European partners to impose sanctions against Moscow. In Munich last May she said in a speech apparently aimed at America that “the times when we could rely entirely on others are to some extent over.” Last July she hosted the G20 group of world leaders in Hamburg at a summit where she sought to encourage multilateralism, free trade and environmental protection.

One reason why Germany needed to think bigger was the refugee crisis. With its geopolitical wings clipped after the second world war, and without Britain’s or France’s imperial legacy, the country long did not engage much with the world beyond Europe and big partners like America and China. The arrival of hundreds of thousands of poor Arabs and Africans in recent years has broadened its strategic horizons. In April 2016 Mrs Merkel said she had requested a world map coloured in to show Europe’s true borders: Ukraine, Georgia, Syria, the Sahara. Such thinking had just prompted a deal with the Turkish president, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, exchanging German money and visas for Turkey’s help with reducing the numbers of refugees entering Europe. Last year the German government proposed a “Marshall Plan” for Africa (recalling America’s massive investment in Europe after the second world war) to help fight poverty in sub-Saharan countries like Nigeria. In August Germany signed a deal to reduce migrant flows from Egypt, based on the Turkish model.
The one exception to Germany’s hands-off foreign policy has been its stance on the European economy. When the euro was created, the Germans insisted that it be modelled on the mighty Deutschmark and refused to entertain a “transfer union” channelling resources from Europe’s austere north to its allegedly spendthrift south. Germany’s politicians and central bankers stoutly defended the value of their country’s money, putting pressure on weaker economies such as France and Italy. Dominique Moïsi, a French writer, urged Germans to “let the sound of Beethoven prevail over the sound of Wagner”.

However, the election as France’s president of the reform-minded and Germanophile Emmanuel Macron has created an opportunity for closer integration of the euro zone, which Germany has long resisted. Mrs Merkel has hinted that she may be willing to shift position, telling Mr Macron on his first visit to Berlin last May that “a little magic dwells in each beginning.” Her new government is open to the idea of a future euro-zone budget and proposes to turn the European Stability Mechanism, currently a fail-safe device, into a “European Monetary Fund”: music to Mr Macron’s ears.

But even though Germany is prepared to take a more active role in the world, and show more emollience in Europe, it may find it hard to deliver on these good intentions. It is struggling, for example, to provide enough working Leopard tanks to meet its NATO commitments. In the days of the cold war it had over 2,000 tanks, but this has come down to about 250, and many of those do not work. Ursula von der Leyen, who has been defence minister since 2013, has battled to modernise the German armed forces, but they still suffer from problems with equipment and remain detached from the country’s wider foreign, security and aid strategies. André Wüstner, chairman of the German Bundeswehr Association, has characterised the German engagement in Afghanistan as “random aid spending, little co-ordination between ministries, paired with illusions of feasibility and excessive expectations”.
The new government, like its predecessor, is notionally committed to the 2% NATO spending target, but will probably end up closer to the current 1.2%. In other areas, too, Germany is underpowered. “It lacks the diplomats to take on several major diplomatic initiatives at once,” notes Sarah Brockmeier of the Global Public Policy Institute, a foreign-policy think-tank in Berlin. In the Ukraine crisis Germany’s assertiveness towards Russia is limited by its continued commitment to NordStream2, a new gas pipeline running direct from Russia to Germany, leaving the countries in between in the cold. The new “Marshall Plan” for Africa involves a puny €1.5bn of additional EU spending.

Europe writ small

Germany’s new Europeanism may prove similarly disappointing. The effusive language of the coalition deal makes no mention of a banking union—the best way of heading off the next euro crisis—and comes with no numbers attached. At most Mr Macron can expect modest concessions from Germany, not the Beethovian transformation he hoped for.

Even as the world is asking Germany to ditch its traditional caution, the country still sees itself as closer to Switzerland than America in scale and thus responsibility. During the election campaign the SPD’s Sigmar Gabriel, then the foreign minister, called the 2% NATO goal an “arms race”. Many also scoff at Mr Macron; even Der Spiegel, a liberal weekly, snootily called the French president an “expensive friend”.

The German public still shows limited interest in a reassessment of Germany’s place in the world. In a study published in December by the Körber Foundation, a think-tank, 52% of respondents thought their country should hold back, against 43% who felt it should become more strongly involved. Ms Brockmeier thinks political leaders need to confront the voters with Germany’s responsibilities. But will they
