Making transitioning simpler would not usurp the rights of women

Just as women and disabled people have fought prejudice, trans people are seeking our place in society, writes Emily Brothers, a politician

https://cdn.static-economist.com/sites/default/files/20180707_BLP527.jpg

Prejudice, discrimination and the fear they cause can take you to dark places. We are all afraid of the consequences of being different and the impact on those close to us. Our innermost thoughts drive us to isolation. It is possible to be busy with lots of people around you, but at the same time very lonely. Ultimately, the response must be to push back against convention and strive for autonomy. As liberation struggles have demonstrated time and time again, this has to happen not only individually but collectively. That’s true for women, gay people and disabled people, as well as those of us with a different gender history. 

As a child, I attended a special school for the blind run by the Sisters of Charity. There, I was told about the importance of integrating into society. The aim was to help us find ways of fitting in and being independent, while relying on the “blind support system”. Unwilling to settle for being a telephonist, audio typist or piano tuner—stereotypical occupations for blind people—I rebelled and went to a mainstream further-education college, followed by university. It was a crucial step towards gaining autonomy.

That experience politicised me, and I joined forces with likeminded people to challenge conventional ways of thinking about disability. We worked to develop the “social model”, which sees disabled people’s experiences as defined by societal attitudes towards disability, as opposed to the “medical model”, which sees us primarily through the lens of our conditions. This evolved into discussion about inclusion—how disabled people can live independently, be included in the broader community and access the education and employment of their choice. 

Taking control of my life as a disabled person kept me occupied. Yet I was never at ease in my sense of self. I felt female, but I thought it wasn’t possible. I wasn’t attracted to men, so how could I be female? As it turned out, quite easily. At the time, though, it was all very confusing. 

Being blind, I couldn’t flick through papers and books in mainstream libraries in search of an answer. Braille material was limited to standard textbooks and classic literature. This was before assistive technology and access to the internet—which have proved amazingly empowering. Back then I was stranded in isolation, desolated by a lack of understanding, unable to speak my innermost thoughts. 

I tried to conform, as to do otherwise would mean ostracism by my socially conservative family, fractured friendships, career jeopardy and perhaps ridicule. I believed that the authentic woman I felt inside could never come to life outside. Bringing up a family and working at senior levels in voluntary and public organisations proved demanding and I achieved a lot. But it was never truly fulfilling while my true self remained hidden. I often thought of ending the pain, even as a teenager. 

But I didn’t have the courage—not until depression walked me into the sea aged 43 in 2007. I wasn’t coping. Everything was falling apart and I couldn’t continue being this disconnected person. If the waves had been stronger that night, I wouldn’t have had the energy to fight. Thinking of leaving my children behind as the tide tossed me around and brought me back to shore, I realised I had to break free of fear. It was winter, but I didn’t feel cold or wet, just dazed by the enormity of the crisis sweeping over me. I made my way up the cliff path without my white cane, having mislaid it. When I got home I threw away the clothes that symbolised a past life, uncluttering my mind to gain the space to feel and learn, beginning a journey into a different future. 

I had told my wife about this inner self some months earlier. Unsurprisingly, she struggled with the information, but it also enabled her to make sense of many things. Though there was something there that she could never reach or understand, everything clicked. Even so, the impact on her sense of womanhood, and the reaction of other people, led to a difficult divorce. 

As time has passed, though, we have rebuilt the great friendship that was always the foundation of our relationship. Now, despite past tensions and sadness, she recognises that my gender transition was the right thing for me to do. Like our children, she has grieved for the passing of the person I used to be and now, a decade later, embraces a woman who is authentic and confident, at peace with herself. She accepts that it was the unfolding of my true identity, not a mid-life crisis or fetish. She also understands that my femininity was not a threat to her, and our parental roles remain complementary. 

Blindness brings challenges for any woman, not least being unable to use a mirror. Applying makeup without help simply turned me orange, so that idea was ditched. I came to realise that it wasn’t necessary to use blusher, eye shadow or lipstick to be a woman. It was about how I feel. That is why I get frustrated with those in the trans community who fixate on glamour, and with the media’s focus on trans models. That look objectifies women, and anyway, few can attain it.

It may seem stereotypical, but I feel immensely fortunate that I align easily with the features of being a woman. At five foot two, with a medium build and long hair, I don’t have to work at “passing” like so many trans people do. I can run out the door without any effort to look the part. A different physique, together with blindness, would have made my transition much more challenging.

Avoiding ridicule and mockery was central to my transition, so I pushed back when the journalist Rod Liddle wrote in the Sun in 2014: “Being blind, how did she know she was the wrong sex?” I responded in the Independent by asking: When Rod Liddle goes to bed at night and turns out the lights, how does he know he is a man? The answer isn’t hard, of course: we don’t need to see the physical manifestations of our sex to know how we feel. Disabled people, just like everyone else, understand their sense of being, gender and sexual orientation.

Overcoming such ignorance is not easy. Intimidation of this kind pushes people back into the closet. That is why I find it bewildering that pioneering feminists wield their pen to deny others their sense of self, reinforcing the power constructs of gender.

With the definition of transgender widening and the notion of self-identification gaining traction, I realise that conventions are being challenged. My transition involved psychiatric supervision, reassignment surgery and legal recognition. Allowing a less complicated journey that does not pathologise people does not usurp my rights or those of any other woman.

Just as women have fought to challenge misogyny, trans people are seeking our place in society. And just as disabled people fought to move from a medical model to a social model, so transgender people are now. Once again, I am part of a movement of people seeking to wrest control of their lives back from those who have historically held power over us.