Racist tweets from Roseanne spur ABC to cancel “Roseanne”

The creator and star of a hit show is hoist by her own petard

ONE of the defining features of life under Donald Trump is that even as his presidency reassures Islamophobes, xenophobes, misogynists, bigots and racists, it simultaneously stiffens the resolve of Americans who value tolerance and inclusion. Take the reaction to a tweet by Roseanne Barr, the eponymous star of the smash-hit reboot of a 20-year-old sitcom. On May 29th Ms Barr tweeted, in response to a thread discussing a loony conspiracy theory about the CIA spying on French presidential candidates in Barack Obama’s time, that “Muslim brotherhood & planet of the apes had a baby=vj”. She was referring to Valerie Jarrett. Ms Jarrett, who was born in Iran but is not Muslim, is the daughter of a distinguished black pathologist and served as an aide to Mr Obama.

Ms Barr later deleted her tweets and apologised to Ms Jarrett. The response was nonetheless swift. Within hours of the tweet, ABC, the television network that airs “Roseanne”, cancelled a planned second season. “Roseanne’s Twitter statement is abhorrent, repugnant and inconsistent with our values, and we have decided to cancel her show,” Channing Dungey, head of ABC entertainment, said in a statement on May 29th. Bob Iger, the boss of Disney, which owns ABC, tweeted that “there was only one thing to do here, and that was the right thing”.

The end of “Roseanne” is a loss for ABC, which had just started to promote the show’s next season to advertisers. ABC’s motivation in cancelling the show was mainly economic: advertisers would have boycotted “Roseanne”, says Clint Wilson, the author of a book on racism and the media. It is a reflection of the growing willingness of corporations to take a political stand; after a recent massacre at a high school in Florida, Delta, an airline, Enterprise, a car-rental company, and other big corporations cut ties with the National Rifle Association.

It is not the first time Ms Barr’s political views have caused consternation. Now a fervent Trump supporter, she once ran for the presidency on a Green Party ticket and championed distinctly liberal views on gay rights and abortion. But she has increasingly taken to retweeting conspiracy theories from the fringes of the internet. On the same day as posting her missive about Ms Jarrett, Ms Barr also tweeted that Chelsea Clinton, daughter of Bill and Hillary, was married to a nephew of George Soros, a philanthropist. She called Mr Soros “a Nazi who turned in his fellow Jews 2 be murdered in German concentration camps & stole their wealth”. In late March she accused David Hogg, a teenager who survived the Florida shootings, of giving a Nazi salute.

Is Ms Barr unhinged? Last year her children took control of her Twitter account, deleted her past tweets and changed her password. Shortly before the premiere of the “Roseanne” reboot, Ms Barr was back on Twitter. ABC took a risk when it commissioned the revival of a show about the lives of ordinary folk in the Midwest. The main danger, it turns out, was the star of the show.