A tarnished victory for Emmerson Mnangagwa in Zimbabwe

Will the West overlook the ruling party’s political gamesmanship?

https://cdn.static-economist.com/sites/default/files/images/2018/08/articles/main/20180804_map502.jpg

ON THE morning of July 30th packed flights left from Johannesburg, in South Africa, to Harare, the capital of Zimbabwe. Scores of Zimbabweans were returning to vote in the country’s first election since 1980 without Robert Mugabe on the ballot. Zimbabwe’s official population is nearly 17m but as many as 5m of its citizens live abroad, having fled an economy ruined by the 94-year-old ex-despot. Young Zimbabweans at the airport brimmed with nervous excitement. But not everyone was off home. Leonard, a Zimbabwean banker in his early 60s, was flying to Namibia on business. “There is no point in going to Zimbabwe,” he explained. “They did not topple Mugabe in November to hand over power now.”

Sure enough, in the early hours of August 3rd, the Zimbabwe Electoral Commission (ZEC) announced that Emmerson Mnangagwa, Mr Mugabe’s former sidekick, who replaced him after a coup last year, had won the presidential race, defeating Nelson Chamisa, the leader of the MDC Alliance, an opposition bloc, by 50.8% to 44.3%. Two days earlier it announced that Mr Mnangagwa’s ruling Zanu-PF party had won a majority of parliamentary seats. Taken together, the results mean that Zanu-PF, which has ruled the country for 38 years, will continue its reign into a fifth decade.

For Mr Mnangagwa the election victory is a qualified success. The 75-year-old president sought two things from the vote. The first was victory. That is his. Mr Chamisa’s party may launch legal challenges, but they are unlikely to succeed. Zimbabwe is facing at least five more years of Zanu-PF.

Mr Mnangagwa’s second aim was to host an election that received an international seal of approval. Zimbabwe is a pariah state with an economy in dire need of foreign exchange. A free and fair election, went the logic, would earn Zimbabwe the West’s blessing to re-enter a lending programme with the International Monetary Fund. And that, in turn, would signal to private creditors and investors to turn on the taps, too.

The second part of Mr Mnangagwa’s strategy has gone less well than the first. The vote was more peaceful and orderly than others in recent memory, but that is a low bar. On August 1st election observers from the EU and American NGOs lined up to condemn the ways in which Zanu-PF had abused its power to sway the vote. As the observers were speaking, MDC supporters hit the streets of Harare, where they were met by volleys of gunfire from quickly dispatched soldiers. At least six people have been reported dead.

Over the next few days voices from America and the EU will continue to ask the ZEC to release a detailed breakdown of the vote. (That Mr Mnangagwa narrowly avoided a run-off by earning a smidgen more than 50% was certainly convenient.) They will utter bromides about the need for Zanu-PF and the MDC to come together. They will continue to list the ways in which the election was not fought on a level playing field. But ultimately they cannot stop Mr Mnangagwa. Nor do some countries want to. Britain has backed the president and his allies for almost three years. It is hardly going to stop.

Attention will soon turn from politics to economics. Zimbabwe’s economy is a mess. The government is overspending; the fiscal deficit is projected to be a colossal 13% of GDP in 2018, and that was before pay rises of about a fifth for civil servants, police and soldiers shortly before the election. To pay for this largesse the government is borrowing money from the central bank that it is unlikely to pay back. The central bank, in turn, is taking real US dollars deposited in commercial banks, and replacing them with electronic deposits of ostensibly equal value. But this is a fiction. Salaries deposited in dollars cannot be withdrawn in that currency; people queue for meagre rations of “bond notes” instead. The scramble for foreign exchange is crippling businesses and pushing up the cost of imported goods. Jars of peanut butter cost $12 in local supermarkets—three times as much as in South Africa.

To begin to put this right Zimbabwe needs help from abroad. This puts some governments in a tricky position: should they overlook the political gamesmanship and violence, so long as Mr Mnangagwa shows he is willing to reform the economy? The likelihood is that many will want to do so, though ultimately the American attitude will be critical to any decision by the IMF.

Whether Mr Mnangagwa and his military allies can in fact restore discipline to the economy, and give foreign investors certainty, remains to be seen. Until then millions of Zimbabweans will continue to work abroad, sending vital remittances home so their families can eat. For his part, Leonard hopes that the next five years will be used to slowly strengthen institutions ruined under Mr Mugabe. “But the fools and the crooks will still be in charge,” he warns. 