Some Western universities see merit in China’s flawed exam

They should think about its politics

https://www.economist.com/sites/default/files/imagecache/640-width/images/print-edition/20180630_CNP002_0.jpg

“DRAWING on your political knowledge, explain why the Communist Party should exercise leadership over the country’s economy, armed forces, schools and all aspects of society.” So read an essay question in this year’s gaokao, China’s university-entrance exam which was held in early June (anxious parents are pictured outside a test centre in the city of Shenyang; results have been announced in the past few days). The test is notoriously tough, but political flattery can help. Examinees in Beijing were asked to discuss an environmental slogan used by President Xi Jinping. The paper noted that more marks would be given for being “positive”.

Despite the Chinese political flavour of some of the questions, growing numbers of Western universities are using gaokao results to select students from China instead of requiring them to sit internationally recognised exams such as the Scholastic Aptitude Test (SAT). This month the University of New Hampshire became the first public state-level university in America to accept gaokao scores. It joins a handful of privately funded American colleges such as New York University and the University of San Francisco. In Canada around 30 universities allow gaokao results to be used instead of the SAT or similar tests. They include the University of Toronto and McGill University. In Australia the University of Sydney took the lead in 2012. Now more than half of Australian colleges welcome the gaokao, including seven members of the prestigious “Group of Eight”. So does Cambridge University in Britain. Other European universities, including in France, Spain and Italy, are following suit.

This should be good news for Chinese students. Previously, taking tests approved by Western universities had usually meant opting out of the gaokao, which requires years of undistracted preparation. Now they can try their luck at both domestic and foreign universities. Last year 1.5m out of more than 9m gaokao takers were repeat examinees. Many of them were sitting it again not because they had failed, but because they wanted another shot at getting into one of the best Chinese universities. The option of sending gaokao results to universities abroad gives them an “exit route”, says Liu Weishi, a parent in Beijing. She says it “spares them an additional year of mind-numbing exam preparation”. Some foreign institutions, including New York University and the University of Toronto, do not set minimum gaokao scores, unlike Chinese counterparts.

Western universities that accept gaokao results do not publicly complain about the political constraints imposed on takers of the exam (it is safe to assume that no marks would have been earned for suggesting the party should not be in charge). But they are aware of its other limitations. They require additional evidence of English-language competency—students often do well in the gaokao’s compulsory English section but have nearly non-existent oral skills. They also know that the gaokao involves a lot of rote learning, and that those who sit it have little time to develop critical-thinking skills. An admissions officer at New York University says the gaokao can still be helpful for evaluating applicants because it assesses “a different readiness”, including self-discipline. Students who get in through the gaokao do “very, very well academically”, she adds.

Others are more sceptical. The University of Melbourne is the only one of Australia’s Group of Eight not to endorse the gaokao. Carolyn Evans, a deputy vice-chancellor there, says the university has “looked at it a number of times” and decided that “other criteria better predicted success in university study.”

That stance may become hard to maintain. Around one-third of international students in Australia and America are from China. Many Western universities are becoming increasingly dependent on revenue from this source. If some top-class universities offer entry using gaokao scores, their competitors may find it hard to resist doing the same.
