How Washington DC’s Metro should deal with white nationalists

Putting on special services for them would be a bad idea

https://cdn.static-economist.com/sites/default/files/20180811_WBP502.jpg

WITH a large group of white nationalists coming to Washington, DC—an overwhelmingly liberal, minority-white city—this weekend, one of the thorniest issues for the city has been how to prevent violent clashes on its public-transport system. And one proposed solution generated such an outcry that it had to be quickly scrapped.

Unite the Right, a white-nationalist group, is marking the one-year anniversary on August 12th of the rally, which killed an counter-protestor, that it held last year in Charlottesville, Virginia, with a demonstration in front of the White House. Local officials want to avoid any violence as people travel to the demonstration—the protestors are planning to take the Metro together from the Virginia suburbs—when the white nationalists will be in close quarters with a racially diverse and anti-white-nationalist public. Jack Evans, the chair of Metro’s board, floated a proposal to provide special separate trains for the Unite the Right crowd.

The backlash was immediate. Members of the public envisioned themselves attempting to board a Metro train, only to be informed that the train was reserved for white nationalists. A trade union representing Metro workers expressed its outrage. Its union’s president told the  Washington Post , a newspaper, “we draw the line at giving special accommodation to hate groups and hate speech.” That raised the prospect of Metro workers would staging their own protest and refusing to operate the trains for Unite the Right. A day later, Mr Evans said Metro would not provide special trains for the demonstrators and claimed, implausibly, that the idea had never been under consideration.

That calmed the firestorm, but it did not settle the question of how to keep people safe on public transport. At the demonstration itself, a police presence should hopefully limit violence, although that failed to prevent a fatality in Charlottesville a year ago. On the Metro, the city may also add more police, but it is difficult to monitor every part of each carriage on a packed train—and some people take issue with all the taxpayer-funded security to facilitate a rally they consider abhorrent.

The debate echoes one that took place in a different sector of the transport industry recently: the dilemma facing airlines as they decided how best to respond to President Donald Trump’s controversial policy of separating undocumented immigrant parents from their children at the border. Here, the concern was not violent clashes, but simply whether and how to wade into politics when making business decisions. United, American, Frontier, and Southwest airlines all  asked the Trump administration  not to use their flights to send children away from their parents. United and Delta followed up by  offering free flights  to reunify families that had been separated.

But airlines are businesses looking out for the bottom line, and they may calculate that they have more to win than to lose by coming out against unpopular policies, even if they turn off some customers. Public-transport networks are government-owned and thus do not have that luxury. They are responsible for providing their services to all members of the paying public. Segregation is politically unacceptable: memories of America’s civil-rights movement against the policy abound. Even a recent suggestion to reintroduce women-only carriages on London’s Underground by Jeremy Corbyn, the leader of the opposition in Britain, was hooted down by some of his own supporters. Metro will just have to hope that there is no trouble this weekend. It may not be the least risky solution, but it is certainly the fairest.