What is the future of free trade?

In a three-part series, our correspondents report on a thorny political problem

https://cdn.static-economist.com/sites/default/files/20180623_BLP527.jpg

THE rise of Donald Trump has been a body-blow to all those who believe that free trade is a good thing. Mr Trump wants to turn America protectionist. Not for many years has free trade been such a hot political topic. But how is the political debate about free trade playing out in other big economies? Quite differently, it turns out. Our correspondents from across the world have written brief pieces which summarise the debate about free trade on their patches. British politicians are, on the whole, obsessed with free trade—even if their electorate is not. China likes free trade, but not globalisation. And not even the most radical Mexican politicians want to draw their country inwards. 

Today we report on the state of play in America and Mexico. Tomorrow we will turn to Europe, before looking at what is happening in Asia the day after.

________________________________________________________________________

THERE is something approaching a folk story surrounding American attitudes to trade. It goes like this: in the 1990s, economists thought that free trade was good for everyone. America’s markets were opened up, first to Mexico, through the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), and then to China, through its permanent accession to the World Trade Organisation. As a result, manufacturing jobs left the country. Then, in the 2010s, economists began to realise that trade had damaged the lives of displaced workers and vulnerable communities, just as politics took a protectionist turn through the rise of Donald Trump and Bernie Sanders.

That story misses several important points. First, economic theory always predicted that free trade would harm some workers. Second, economists were not blind to the falling economic prospects of unskilled American workers. Rather, they just attributed the rising inequality between skilled and unskilled workers primarily to technological progress.

Third, this view—that technological progress, rather than global trade, has had the bigger impact on workers—is still reasonable. It is true that economists have become more convinced of trade’s concentrated costs for displaced manufacturing workers, roughly a third of whom experienced unusually severe wage losses. But there have not been enough so-called “losers” to drive the huge changes in the labour market that have taken place. Finally, the most recent trend is that Americans have become more sympathetic to trade, not less.

IS ANTI-TRADE sentiment made in America? It certainly seemed so when Donald Trump’s tirades against his country’s North American Free Trade Agreement with Canada and Mexico shattered a seeming consensus in favour of free trade. NAFTA, Mr Trump says, is the “worst trade deal ever made”, the fault of stupid politicians who gave away a fantastic deal to Mexicans, who cannot believe their luck. Many Americans believe that the benefits of NAFTA have mostly flowed southwards, to America’s cost; Mexicans tend to think the opposite. They share the view that renegotiating NAFTA would be a good thing.

Why are some Mexicans dissatisfied with NAFTA? The pact was sold to the Mexican public as a deal that would bring the country’s standard of living closer to that of the United States. But the salary gap between the countries has widened, not closed, since NAFTA arrived. Many of the jobs NAFTA has created are in maquiladora factories along the border. That is good for Mexico’s border states, but the benefits have not flowed through the rest of the economy. Compare Chiapas, an impoverished southern state, and Aguascalientes, a state to the north where investment has poured in. In the two decades after 1993, GDP doubled in Aguascalientes but grew by just 1% in Chiapas.

And yet when Mr Trump threatens to tear up NAFTA, most Mexicans fret about the economic consequences. Mexico depends much more on trade with America than vice versa. In the campaign for presidential elections, due on July 1st, candidates have spoken at length about domestic issues like crime and corruption, but little about trade or Trumpism. Even Andrés Manuel López Obrador, an old-school populist who is the overwhelming favourite to win, seems unlikely to jeopardise the country’s trading relationship with the United States. Despite a history of anti-trade positions, he says he wants to improve the deal, not scrap it. 

The country has maintained its predisposition towards openness. Most Mexicans appreciate the value of an open world where people, goods and ideas can travel freely across borders, whether it is the upper class studying in American universities, the middle class seeking factory jobs or the lower class receiving remittances from abroad. With the exception of Chile, Mexico has more free-trade deals than any other country. Previously closed sectors of the economy, such as the oil industry, are now open to foreign investment. But Mr Trump’s antipathy towards Mexico has exposed the pitfalls of relying too much on a single trading partner. Mexico ships 80% of all exports to the United States. It is now trying to diversify, looking to South America to buy its beef and soyabeans, successfully expanding its trade pact with the European Union and looking to join the Trans-Pacific Partnership with ten other countries. How fruitful these moves are remains to be seen. Agustín Carstens, until recently the head of the central bank, says that Mexican businesses have long succumbed to the “magnetic force that the US [economy] exercises on us”.

The notion of a country trying to look beyond its main trading partner and closest neighbour may sound familiar to readers in Britain. A staff member at the British embassy in Mexico recently quipped that Britain’s post-Brexit message to the world, of unshackling itself from an old relationship and heading out into the world to forge new ties, was being well received in Mexico. “If I said these things in Germany they would laugh at me,” the official jokes. Countries like Britain will always find a receptive audience in Mexico, which has shown that it can be a good partner when the other side is dealing in good faith.