The leaders of the two Koreas put on another great performance

But can they entice America back to the negotiating table?

https://cdn.static-economist.com/sites/default/files/images/2018/09/articles/main/20180922_asp002.jpg

THE setting keeps changing; the pictures, not so much. Kim Jong Un, North Korea’s dictator, welcomed Moon Jae-in, the South’s president, to Pyongyang airport on September 18th for their third summit since April. As during the previous two, there were hugs and smiles galore. Some were reserved for the North Korean children who presented Mr Moon and his wife with bouquets and military salutes. Later, the two leaders went on a jaunt in an open-topped limo through Pyongyang. The streets were lined with women in brightly coloured traditional dresses, who waved yet more bouquets and sent up cheers of “Unification!”

The declaration that the two leaders presented in a press conference, broadcast live from Pyongyang (and on North Korean state television) on the second day of their three-day meeting, was similarly upbeat. As at their summit in April, they solemnly pledged to turn the Korean peninsula into “a land of peace without nuclear weapons or nuclear threats”.

Building on the Panmunjom declaration, which the two men signed in April, the agreement showed a clear commitment to deepen inter-Korean ties. Mr Kim said he would visit Seoul “in the near future”. The two pledged to restore road and rail links between North and South before the end of the year and to put in a joint bid to host the Olympics in 2032. In Seoul, the South’s capital, subway stations were decked out in adverts for the summit that featured mock Seoul-Pyongyang train tickets superimposed on a map of the peninsula and promised “further miracles”. The leaders also vowed to reduce military tensions: a 55-page addendum signed by their defence ministers stipulated the movement of guard posts away from the border and the end of military exercises near it. Chung Eui-yong, Mr Moon’s national security adviser, called it “effectively a non-aggression pact”.

The economic measures set out in the agreement cannot be implemented without an easing of international sanctions, however. That would require American support. Mr Moon had hoped to get Mr Kim to announce bold steps towards giving up his nuclear weapons, to help convince America that the North was sincere. On this the agreement was less eye-catching. Mr Kim promised to dismantle the missile-testing site at Dongchang-ri in the presence of “experts from relevant countries” and, should America make reciprocal concessions, to close the Yongbyon nuclear site. But he made no mention of an inventory of his nuclear arsenal or a timeline to dismantle it. As it stands, the agreement is unlikely to persuade America to ease sanctions or sign a peace treaty, even though Mr Trump pronounced it “very exciting” in a tweet.

“What matters now is if Kim offered anything extra for Moon to take to Trump,” says Christopher Green of the International Crisis Group, a think-tank. Mr Moon is meeting Mr Trump in a few days, and may have an offer of some sort to convey. But the gap between America’s expectations and the North’s is getting harder to bridge. As he surveys the peninsula from the summit of Mount Paektu, a climb up which is the final stop on his trip to the North, Mr Moon may begin to wonder whether his success as a mediator has peaked.