On nationalism, free speech and Donald Trump’s idea of justice

The latest news from the Open Future initiative’s Open Future initiative aims to remake the case for the classical liberal values of individual freedom and free markets in the 21st century. Highlights from this week’s activity include:

An interview with Mario Vargas Llosa, a Peruvian writer and Nobel laureate.  “I believe that the great danger in our age is nationalism, it’s no longer fascism, nor communism. These ideologies have become completely outdated,” he says. “Nationalism is a defect that is always there under the surface and above all, at moments of crisis, can be very easily exploited by demagogues and power-hungry leaders... One must fight nationalism energetically if one believes in democracy.” Read our interview with Mr Vargas Llosa in the  English translation or the original Spanish.
 
An online debate on whether universities should host speakers with offensive views. The debate ended with 15% believing that “no platforming” was acceptable, and 85% defending the right to free speech. “Censorship has impeded human and social progress. It has obstructed the spread of empirical science [and has been] used to promote slavery and the oppression of women,” argued Larry Summers, a former president of Harvard University and American treasury secretary. Some commenters agreed. “Don't censor the ideas. Force the debate,” wrote Rich Baker. But a commenter called Viola took a different side: “The question is not whether offensive ideas should be banned, the question is whether racist programs of action should be prevented. The recent appearance of far-right extremists on campuses is not about speech. It is [an] effort to attack the most basic human and civil rights of targeted communities.”

Several “explainer” essays set the scene for the themes that the Open Future initiative will explore. The Economist’s editor-in-chief, Zanny Minton Beddoes, provided an overview with a letter to readers. The project consists of five themes: Open Borders on migration, Open Ideas on free speech, Open Markets on free trade, Open Society on diversity and Open Progress on technology. There’s also a youth essay contest. The Open Society essay tapped a nerve. One commenter, Tom Meadowcroft, challenged those on the left over the nature of diversity: “Diversity is a thing to be prized, according to some, but only diversity in skin color, religion, or ethnicity. Diversity in political views quickly leads to ostracism from superficially 'diverse' groups. Diversity in income is a sin. Diversity in lifestyles is only good within a certain subset.”

We explored other themes in video and podcasts. President Donald Trump’s controversial relationship with the Department of Justice and the judiciary, and the question of how rights are upheld in America, were considered in a video. In a podcast, Imran Khan, a candidate for prime minister in Pakistan’s upcoming elections, discussed how best to strengthen the rule of law.

Up next on Open Future: our next online debate, starting on April 30th, examines whether the tech giants merit more regulation. Be sure to participate and join the conversation..
