Kanye West’s failed redemption

“Ye”, the rapper’s latest album, is not musically interesting enough to atone for his sins

https://cdn.static-economist.com/sites/default/files/20180609_BKP501.jpg

IT IS easy to forget how deeply the world reviled Kanye West in 2009. He had committed what seemed at the time a virtuoso act of indecency at an awards show, interrupting a 19-year-old singer accepting a prize to tell her “Imma let you finish” before letting everyone know that a more deserving winner was sitting in the audience. Media commentators spent weeks bashing Mr West for his rudeness. He was forced to cancel an upcoming tour. A reality-TV star named Donald Trump urged a boycott on all things West “so that this kind of thing doesn’t happen again”.

But like it or not, pop culture’s worst sinners are always only one artistic statement away from redemption. Mr West spent months in “self-imposed exile” in Hawaii and the ensuing album, “My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy” (2010) is regarded by many as the finest of this decade. Its emotional centrepiece, “Runaway”, spelled out the price of flawed genius: “now pick your next move, you can leave or live with it.” With the heights of his ambitions surpassing the weight of his worst behaviour, Mr West’s past transgressions were forgotten.

This episode loomed in the background when Mr West reached scandalous new heights in April. Between tweeting about love and freedom and promising fans a new album on June 1st, the rapper turned his mind to Mr Trump, who has changed careers since 2009. “The mob can’t make me not love Trump,” Mr West tweeted, calling the American president his “brother” and claiming they “are both dragon energy”. He donned a “Make America Great Again” cap and suggested that African-Americans who suffered under slavery for four centuries had chosen their own fate. Mr Trump has seemingly warmed to him. “Kanye West has performed a great service to the Black Community,” he tweeted.

Fans disagreed. To many, Mr West’s past impulses, like when he veered off script at a Hurricane Katrina appeal on live television, were amusing and empowering (he 

 “George Bush doesn’t care about black people.”) Black Americans who feel unable to speak their mind enjoyed seeing what Mr West could get away with. They loathed watching him identify with Mr Trump, a president who has 

 Others were less shocked. “Wow, I can’t believe Kanye likes a rich guy with megalomania and an inferiority complex,” honked one commentator. Hovering above the rancour was the question of whether Mr West could repeat the trick from 2010 and find absolution through his next release.

Alas, “Ye”, Mr West’s eighth album, falls short of the overwhelming gesture he needed. The first problem is that it is too short. At 23 minutes, around a third of the length of “My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy”, Mr West simply does not give himself enough time and space to construct something memorable. It is partly not his fault: shorter albums are in vogue because they take less time to produce, so artists can make them more frequently (The Weeknd and Pusha T have also released 20-minute “albums” this year). “Ye” is part of a series of seven-track albums coming out on Mr West’s record label this year. Still, it feels like Mr West has released a short story when fans were expecting the Great American Novel.

The production on “Ye”, though excellent, branches from Mr West’s earlier work, whereas past records felt like an experimental seed dropped in the ground to sprout in pop culture for years ahead. Parts of the album seem rushed; several songs feel unfinished. His wife, Kim Kardashian West, said her husband took the photo that appears on the album cover en route to the album’s listening party on June 1st. Perhaps Mr West is planning a repeat of “The Life Of Pablo” (2016), which he constantly “fixed” after its release, updating it with new songs, production and lyrics. More likely is that he simply did not bother to develop “Ye” to his usual standards. Tellingly, the album’s finest moments come when Mr West retreats from centre stage, in particular 707 Shake’s cameo on “Ghost Town”, the only track here likely to rank among fans’ favourite Kanye West songs.

Mercifully, Mr West does not litter the album with political commentary. The only allusion to his comments about slavery is in “Wouldn’t Leave”, where he packages his own flaws along with everyone else’s. “For any guy that ever fucked up…this for you,” he says at the end. “Violent Crimes”, the closing track, provides another attempt at introspection: Mr West talks of learning at last to respect women after becoming the father of a daughter. Elsewhere, “Ye” gives the listener new exposure to Mr West’s weak points. The rapper references his addiction to opioids, bipolar disorder, which he says he has, and suicidal thoughts. The result is at best an image of an ageing rapper with fading powers, who just about had enough in him for seven songs. At worst, it feels like a cry for help.

“Ye” will probably fail to return scorned fans into Mr West’s arms, but that is merely the latest ominous sign for the rapper. Approaching 41 in a profession that favours youth, he is not the type to transform gracefully into an elder statesman that says little. Some DJs say they now avoid playing his music in clubs because of a 

. Mr West’s career has been defined by an obsession with fame and attention. “I made that bitch famous,” he rapped in 2016 about Taylor Swift, the young woman whose speech he had interrupted on stage seven years earlier. A rapper who sought out controversy and attention at the height of his fame might be about to endure the ultimate reckoning: the pain of declining cultural relevance.