The cost of rescinding work permits for spouses of immigrants on H-1B visas

The most skilled migrant workers may go to places with more generous policies

https://cdn.static-economist.com/sites/default/files/20180908_USP501.jpg

AS PART of the Trump administration’s broad crackdown on immigration, it has ramped up challenges to applications for the H-1B visas used to authorise entry for high-skilled migrant workers. Technology firms—the most active users of the H-1B programme—are threatening to move work overseas if they cannot bring people to America to do it. But the administration is also dismantling a programme that benefited the families of H1-B workers, who are issued H-4 visas. The H-4 category, which allows residency but, traditionally, not the right to employment, was once known as the "involuntary housewife visa". In 2015, the Obama administration created a programme to provide H-4 visa holders with work permits. Some 100,000 H-4 holders have applied for a permit since then. But the Trump administration is in the final stages of cancelling the programme under the president’s “Buy American and Hire American” executive order. The reversal will have a considerable social and economic cost, particularly for women.

Migrant spouses forced to stay at home by employment bans often report feelings of social isolation and frustration. There is some evidence they are at greater risk of domestic abuse. Beyond the psychological and physical costs, taking away their right to work is likely to reduce the economic returns of the H-1B programme itself. Pooja Vijayakumar and Christopher Cunningham at the University of Tennessee surveyed the Indian technology professionals working in America who account for about three-quarters of H1-B visas. They found that restrictions on spousal employment were associated with financial concerns, lower satisfaction at work and lower overall life satisfaction—in turn significant factors in both worker employment and retention. A major justification for the original decision to issue work permits to H-4 visa holders was because other countries competing for skilled immigrants already offered work permits to their partners. If it is reversed, the most skilled migrant workers may go to jurisdictions with more generous policies. 

Reversing the programme will also directly remove skilled employees from the workforce. Ayoung Kim and colleagues at Purdue University found that 90% of H-4 spouses have at least some college education and around one third hold higher degrees. If they were employed at similar levels to immigrants with the same demographic and educational characteristics but who already have the legal right to a job, Ms Kim and colleagues suggest 46% of the spouses would be working. In aggregate, they would be earning about $2.1bn.

Meanwhile, the policy reversal will be unequally felt between men and women. The researchers at the University of Tennessee report that around 90% of H-1B spouses affected are wives; 10% are husbands. This policy, underminding female labour force participation, would seem to contradict President Donald Trump’s professed commitment to women’s economic empowerment. In March last year, Mr Trump declared that “My administration will work every day to ensure that our economy is a place where women can work, succeed, and thrive like never before.” Apparently, that ambition comes a distant second to the goal of excluding migrants of any gender from America’s labour force.